<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book XII: Let Us Love One Another</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-12" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Let Us Love One Another</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The last old-Polish banquet⁠—The Arch-service⁠—Explanation of its figures⁠—Its movements⁠—<span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span> receives a present⁠—More about the Penknife⁠—<span xml:lang="pl">Kniaziewicz</span> receives a present⁠—First exercise of authority by Thaddeus on taking possession⁠—Observations by Gervasy⁠—A concert of concerts⁠—The Polonaise⁠—Let us love one another.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>At length the doors flew open with loud noise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> entered in a cap, with head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upraised, he nor saluted, nor took place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At table, for the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> cometh forth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a new semblance; marshal of the court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bears a wand in sign of office; with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wand he points to all a seat, and places</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guests in turn. First, as the highest ruler</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the district, took the Chamberlain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marshal the seat of honour, velvet chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ivory arms! Beside him, on the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat General <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span>, on the left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were <span xml:lang="pl">Kniaziewicz</span>, and <span xml:lang="pl">Pac</span>, and <span xml:lang="pl">Malachowski</span>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mid them the lady of the Chamberlain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then other ladies, officers and lords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobles and country people, men and women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alternately, by couples, sit in order,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Where’er the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> indicates.</span>
					<span>The Judge,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saluting, left the banquet. In the courtyard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must regale the peasant company.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind a table he had gathered them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two furlongs long; himself sat at one end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the other sat the parish priest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thaddeus and Sophia did not sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At table; busied with the entertaining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They ate while walking; ’twas an ancient custom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the first banquet, that the new possessors</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Themselves should serve the people.</span>
					<span>In the meantime</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guests, while dishes waited in the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the great centre-piece astonished looked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its metal precious as the workmanship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tradition says Prince <span xml:lang="pl">Radziwill</span> the Orphan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had caused this set in Venice to be made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from his own designs to be adorned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Polish fashion. Then the centre-piece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was captured in the Swedish war; it came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None knew in what way, to a noble house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day, it had been taken from the treasury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And occupied the middle of the board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its great circle, as a cart-wheel broad.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The service was o’erlaid, from depth to border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With froth and sugar snowy-white; it showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A winter landscape excellently well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In midst rose black a mighty sweetmeat grove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around were houses like to villages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nobles’ farmsteads,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-259" id="noteref-259" epub:type="noteref">259</a> spread with sugar froth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of rime-frost; on the margin stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vessels for ornament, small personages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashioned of porcelain, in Polish dresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like to actors on a stage they seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Presenting some events; their gesture given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most artfully, the colours vivid, voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone they wanted, otherwise alive.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What should these represent?” the guests inquired.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereon the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> raised his wand on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus discoursed⁠—meanwhile was <i xml:lang="pl">wódka</i> given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before they ate⁠—“By the permission of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gracious gentlemen, these personages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That here you countless see, present a history</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Polish <i xml:lang="pl">sejmiks</i>, councils, voting, triumphs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quarrels. I myself this scene imagined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And will explain it to you.</span>
					<span>“Here, to right,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You see a numerous crowd of noblemen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the Diet to a banquet asked.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The table waiteth covered; no one seats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guests; they stand in groups, each group takes counsel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look, in the midst of every group there stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man, whose opened lips, whose lifted eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unquiet hands, denote the orator.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Explaining somewhat, with his finger he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth emphasise his speaking, with his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He illustrates his meaning. Here are speakers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who recommend their candidate, with various</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Success, as from their brother nobles’ mien</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>You may perceive.</span>
					<span>“True, in this second group</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles list attentive, this one plants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands upon his girdle, lends his ear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That one his hand holds to his ear, and twirls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silence his moustache; he probably</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Collects the words, and in his memory strings them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The orator rejoices, for he sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are convinced, and stroketh down his pouch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has their votes already in his pouch.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But in the third assembly other things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are passing. Here the orator must seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hearers by their girdles. Look, they wrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Themselves away, retire their ears. Look how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This hearer swells with rage; he lifts his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threatens the orator, and stops his mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing, no doubt, the praises of his rival;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This other, stooping like a bull his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’d say to take the speaker on his horns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some draw their sabres, some take to their heels.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“One noble silent stands among the groups;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We see he is an independent man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hesitates and fears⁠—how shall he vote?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not knowing, and in conflict with himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He asks of fate, he lifts his hand, puts forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forefingers, half-shuts his eyes, with nail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes aim at nail; this conjuring will confirm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His vote, for if the fingers meet, he gives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vote affirmative, but if they miss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He casts a negative.</span>
					<span>“The left presents</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another scene⁠—a convent dining-hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned to a hall of meeting of the nobles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The elders on a bench sit in a row,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young men stand, and gaze with eagerness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt the heads towards the centre. Midmost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Marshal stands; in hand he holds the urn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He counts the balls, the nobles with their eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devour them, in this instant he has shaken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last one out; the heralds lift their hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaim the elected legislator’s name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“One nobleman heeds not the general concord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look, from the window of the convent kitchen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thrusts his head; look how his eyes start forth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How bold he looks, how wide he opes his lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though he would the chamber all devour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Easy it is to guess this nobleman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has cried out, “Veto!” Look how, at this sudden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindling of quarrel, to the doors the throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rush, to the kitchen certainly they go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have drawn their sabres, sure a bloody fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Will now begin.</span>
					<span>“But in the corridor,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consider, gentlemen, this ancient priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wears a cope. This is the prior; he bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Host from off the altar; and a boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clad in a surplice, sounds a bell, and craves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Admission; presently the nobles sheathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sabres, cross themselves, and kneel. The priest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turns to that quarter where the sword yet clashes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon as he comes all peaceful is and still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah! you, young sirs, cannot remember this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How ’mid our stormy and free-ruling nobles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All armed, no need at all was of police;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While faith was flourishing and laws respected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then freedom was with order, and abundance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of glory! But in other lands, I hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The government maintaineth soldiery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Police, gendarmes, and constables; but if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sword alone can guard the public safety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in these lands is Freedom I believe not.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just then, upon his snuff-box tapping, spoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain: “Sir <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, please to lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aside till later on these histories.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truly the <i xml:lang="pl">sejmik</i> is most interesting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we are hungry. Order that the dishes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Be brought in.”</span>
					<span>Thereunto the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, lowering</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wand unto the ground: “Illustrious,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most Powerful Chamberlain, allow me pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This favour. I will end at once the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scene of these diets. Here is the new Marshal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne by his partisans from the refect’ry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look how the brother nobles throw their caps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloft, they ope their lips to cry, ‘Long live!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But there, upon the other side, the noble</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outvoted, lonely, on his moody brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has pressed his cap. His wife before the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awaits him; she has guessed what late occurred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor woman! in her servant’s arms she faints!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor woman! for she thought to have the title,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious, Most Powerful; but again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For three years she is only a Most Powerful.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> ended his description here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave a signal with his wand. And soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With dishes lackeys entered, two and two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soups, the <i xml:lang="pl">barszcz</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-260" id="noteref-260" epub:type="noteref">260</a> called royal, and the <i xml:lang="pl">rosol</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-261" id="noteref-261" epub:type="noteref">261</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ancient Poland, artfully prepared;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereto the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> had with wondrous secrets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast in some small pearls, and a piece of money.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such <i xml:lang="pl">rosol</i> purifies the blood, and health</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth fortify. Then followed other dishes;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who shall tell their names? who understand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, in our times already quite unknown?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those fishes, salmon from the Danube, dried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Venetian and Turkish caviar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soles, carp, and mackerel, pike and “noble carp.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last a mystery of cookery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fish uncut, fried slightly at the head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roasted in the centre, at the tail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Some preparation made with sauce.</span>
					<span>The guests</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor asked the names of all these dishes, nor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wondrous secret stayed them; quick they ate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All things with soldiers’ appetite, and filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their goblets up with wine of Hungary.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But in the meantime the great service<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-262" id="noteref-262" epub:type="noteref">262</a> changed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its colour; bare of snow, it now looked green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that light sugary froth, now gradually</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warmed by the summer’s heat, had melted, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The under side discovered, hitherto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concealed from the eye; and so the landscape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Presented a new season of the year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shone with green and many-coloured spring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There came forth various grains, as on the ways</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They grow; the saffron wheat luxuriant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With golden ears, the rye with silver leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And buckwheat, formed by art, of chocolate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pear and apple orchards blossoming.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The guests have scarcely time to enjoy the gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of summer; vainly they entreat the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to prolong them, for the service now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to the planet, in its destined orbit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changes its season; now the painted grains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden, have gathered warmth within the room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gradually melt, the grass turns yellow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leaves turn red, and fall; thou wouldst have said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An autumn wind was blowing; at the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those trees, late well-adorned, appearing stripped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By storm-winds and by hoar frost, naked stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were but twigs of cinnamon, or branches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bay twigs, counterfeiting pine-trees, dressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With needles, that were seeds of carraway.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The guests, while drinking, stript the branches off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stems and bark, and ate them with their wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> viewed his service all around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And full of joy triumphant glances turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Upon the guests.</span>
					<span>Henry <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span> showed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Immense astonishment, and said, “Sir <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were those Chinean shadows? has Pineti</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given you his devils to your service?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-263" id="noteref-263" epub:type="noteref">263</a> are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such services in general use in Litva?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do all hold banquets with such ancient customs?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pray tell me; I have spent my life abroad.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> answered, bowing: “No, Illustrious,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most Powerful General, no godless art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is this. ’Tis but a memory of those feasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renowned in lordly houses of old times,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Poland happiness and power enjoyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I have done I gathered from this book.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou askest, whether everywhere in Litva</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This custom is preserved. Alas! new fashions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among us even have crept in. Not one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young lord cries out, he suffers no excess;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So like a Jew he stints his guests in meat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drink; will grudge Hungarian wine, and drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Satanic, falsified, and modern wines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Muscovy, Champagne; then in the evening</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loses at cards full gold enough to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A banquet to a hundred brother nobles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, even⁠—for what is in my heart to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll truly speak, let but the Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not take this ill of me⁠—when I drew out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This wondrous service from the treasury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, even the Chamberlain did laugh at me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said it was a wearisome machine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old-world thing, it seemed a toy for children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unsuitable to such illustrious men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge! the Judge said, it would tire the guests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ne’ertheless, from that astonishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I caused you, gentlemen, I well perceive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That this fine art was worthy to be seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know not if another such occasion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will come to entertain in <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such dignitaries. I see, General,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You knowledge have of banquets. Pray accept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This book. It will be useful to you when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You give a banquet to a company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of foreign monarchs, bah! ev’n to Napoleon!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let me, ere I consecrate this book</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To you, relate the chance whereby it fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Into my hands.”</span>
					<span>This instant rose a murmur</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outside the door, together many voices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried, “Long live Weathercock!” Into the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A crowd did press, with Matthew at their head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge his guest conducted to the board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placed him high among the generals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said, “Sir Matthew, you are no good neighbour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You have arrived too late, when dinner is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nigh over.”⁠—“I am early,” said Dobrzynski.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I came not here for eating, but because</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had the curiosity to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our national army nearer. There is much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To talk of, but ’tis neither here nor there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles saw and dragged me here by force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you have seated me at table. Thanks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My neighbour.” Having said this, upside down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned his plate, as sign he would not eat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And kept a gloomy silence.</span>
					<span>“Friend Dobrzynski,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said to him General Dombrowski, “you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are that renowned swordsman of <span xml:lang="pl">Kosciuszko</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Matthew called the Rod. I know you from</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your fame. But, prithee, how art thou preserved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So vigorous, so active? what long years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have passed away. Look, I am growing old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look, even <span xml:lang="pl">Kniaziewicz</span> is somewhat grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou might’st hold thine own with young men still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And does thy Rod yet flourish as ere time?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I heard that thou didst discipline the Russians</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not long ago. But where are now thy brothers?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should exceedingly rejoice to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those Penknives, and your Razors, last examples</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of ancient Lithuania.”</span>
					<span>“General,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replied the Judge, “after that victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearly the whole of the Dobrzynskis took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refuge within the Duchy, probably</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went into some legion.”⁠—“Ay, indeed,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said a young officer of squadron, “I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have in the second company a whiskered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarecrow, Dobrzynski, who doth call himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sprinkler, but the Polish soldiers call him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lithuanian Bear. But if the General</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commands it, we will fetch him here.”⁠—“There are,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said a lieutenant, “others by their race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Litva, one a soldier, called by name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Razor, and one more who with a trombone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rides on the flank; and also in a regiment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shooters, two Dobrzynskis, grenadiers.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But, but⁠—about their chief,” the General</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replied; “I wish to know about this Penknife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> told me such great wonders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As of some giant of the elder time.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Penknife,” said the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, “though he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not into exile, yet as fearing inquest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concealed himself from search of Muscovites.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poor man wandered all the winter long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the forests, lately he came forth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He might be useful in these warlike times,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ’tis a valiant man, ’tis only pity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s somewhat pressed by age. But there he is.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> pointed in the hall, where stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Servants and village folk together crowded.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But over all the heads gleamed suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shining bald pate, like to a full moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times it issued forth, and three times vanished</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the cloud of heads. The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, passing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bowed, till he loosed him from the crush, and said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Illustrious, Most Powerful Hetman of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Crown, or General⁠—the title is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A trifling matter⁠—I <span xml:lang="pl">Rembajlo</span> am.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I stand at your command with this my Penknife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That not from workmanship, nor from inscriptions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor from the temper of its blade such glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earned, that even you, Illustrious Powerful Sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew of it. If it could but speak, maybe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It might say something tending to the praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ev’n of this ancient hand it served so long;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faithful, may Heaven be thanked, to Fatherland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the lords of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span> race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose memory still is famous among men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mopanku seldom any district Writer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So deftly trims his pen, as this does heads.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twere long to reckon up. And ears and noses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Countless! And on this Penknife is no notch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never any murderous deed has stained it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once only!-give him, Lord, eternal rest!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An unarmed man, alas! it once despatched.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But even that, God be my witness, was</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Pro bono publico.”</span>
					<span>“Well, show it here,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said General Dombrowski, laughing. “But</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a handsome Penknife, truly ’tis</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A headsman’s sword!” With great astonishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked upon the rapier, and in turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Showed it to all the other officers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They proved it all, but scarcely one of them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could lift this rapier. It is said Dembinski,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-264" id="noteref-264" epub:type="noteref">264</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renowned for strength of arm, might have upraised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This sabre, but he was not there. Of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then present, only might <span xml:lang="pl">Dwernicki</span>, chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of squadron, and <span xml:lang="pl">Rosycki</span>, of platoon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lieutenant, turn this iron pole around;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the rapier went from hand to hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In turn, on proof.</span>
					<span>But General <span xml:lang="pl">Kniaziewicz</span>,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The most illustrious in stature, showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he was likewise strongest in the arm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding the rapier lightly, as a sabre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He raised it, and above all heads he made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its lightnings gleam, remembering all the arts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Polish fencing, cross-stroke, mill, and curved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stroke, stolen cut, and thrusts of contrapunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of tercets, which he likewise understood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>For he was of the School of Cadets.</span>
					<span>As</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fenced thus, laughing, did <span xml:lang="pl">Rembajlo</span> kneel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embrace him round the knees, and cry with tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At every turn the sword made: “Beautiful;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say, General, wert thou a Confederate?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most beautiful, most perfectly! That is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pulawski’s thrust, thus <span xml:lang="pl">Dzierzanowski</span> stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is the thrust of Sawa!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-265" id="noteref-265" epub:type="noteref">265</a> who thus formed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your hand, except Matthias Dobrzynski? But</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, General, is my invention. Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbid! I do not praise myself! That stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is only in the <i xml:lang="pl">zascianek</i> known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the <span xml:lang="pl">Rembajlos</span>, from my name ’tis called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mopanku’s stroke. Who taught it to you, sir?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is my own stroke, mine!” He rose, the General</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seizing in his embrace. “Now shall I die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In peace. There’s yet upon the earth a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who will my dear child cherish! For indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both day and night I long have sorely grieved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest this my rapier rust when I am dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold, it shall not rust! My most Illustrious,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most Powerful General, pardon me, throw off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those <i xml:lang="de">spits</i>, those German swords; to a noble child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twere shame to wear those sticks. Take here a sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That suits a noble! This my Penknife I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here lay before your feet, the dearest thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the world I own. I never had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wife, I have no child; it was to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both wife and child; it never left my arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From morn till twilight have I cherished it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By night it slept beside me, and when I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew old, it on the wall hung o’er my couch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As o’er a Jew the Lord’s commandments. I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have thought it should be buried in my grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together with my hand. But I have found An heir.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Thee let it serve.”</span>
					<span>The General,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-laughing, with emotion half o’ercome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Comrade,” he said, “if thou dost yield thy wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And child to me, through thy remaining years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt be very lonely, old and widower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And childless. Tell me, by what gift shall I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repay thee, and by what thy childless state</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And widowhood assuage?”⁠—“Am I <span xml:lang="pl">Cybulski</span>?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-266" id="noteref-266" epub:type="noteref">266</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> said in grief, “who lost his wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At cards unto a Muscovite, the tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The song relates? It is enough for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That yet my Penknife shines before the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In such a hand. But, General, remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sword-belt must be long, extended well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it is long, and aye from the left ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike with both edges, so shalt thou cut through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>From head to belly.”</span>
					<span>Then the General</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Penknife took, but since it was so long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could not wear it; so the servants laid it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe in the baggage wagon. What of it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Became, concerning that were differing tales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But none for certain knew, nor then, nor after.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span> said to Matthew, “How now, comrade!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twould seem my coming does not much rejoice thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent and sour! Why does thy heart not leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see the eagles, golden, silver, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trumpeters <span xml:lang="pl">Kosciuszko</span>’s réveille</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sound in thine ears? Matthew, I thought thou wert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bolder fellow! If thou wilt not draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy sabre, and on horseback mount, at least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou’lt drink with thy companions merrily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Napoleon’s and to Poland’s health.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ha!” Matthew said, “I see what here is doing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, sir, two eagles may not nest together.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lords’ favour, Hetman, rides on piebald horse.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-267" id="noteref-267" epub:type="noteref">267</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Emperor’s a great warrior, much is there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To talk of. I remember the Pulawskis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-268" id="noteref-268" epub:type="noteref">268</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>My friends, were used to say about Dumourier,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-269" id="noteref-269" epub:type="noteref">269</a>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Poland there must be a Polish hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Frenchman, nor Italian, but a Piast;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-270" id="noteref-270" epub:type="noteref">270</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must be a John, a Joseph, or a Matthew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="pl">E basta!</i> Army! Polish ’tis, they say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But fusiliers, and sappers, grenadiers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cannoniers; we hear more German titles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than native in this crowd. Who understands this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there must also be among you Turks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Tartars, or schismatics, with no God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or faith. Myself I saw it! they assault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The women in the hamlets, rob the passers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pillage churches. Moscow. The Emperor goes to Moscow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long way, if his Majesty the Emperor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has made this undertaking without God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have heard he is already under curse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a bishop. All this is”⁠—here Matthew dipped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bread in the soup, and eating, ended not</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His sentence.</span>
					<span>Matthew’s sayings did not please</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain. The younger folk besides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to murmur. Then the Judge broke off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These quarrels, by proclaiming the arrival</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of the third pair betrothed.</span>
					<span>It was the Regent.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself proclaimed himself the Regent, else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None would have known him. Hitherto he had worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Polish costume, but now Telimena,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His future wife,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-271" id="noteref-271" epub:type="noteref">271</a> obliged him by a clause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of marriage-contract to renounce the <i xml:lang="pl">kontusz</i>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so the Regent willy-nilly dressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself in French costume. Well might be seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <i xml:lang="pl">frac</i> had taken half his soul away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stepped as he a stick had swallowed, straight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmoving, like a crane; he dared not look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To right or left; he came with stately mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from his mien one saw he suffered tortures.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew not how to bend, or where to place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands, who so loved gestures. At his girdle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would have placed his hands⁠—there was no girdle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he but stroked his waist. He saw his error;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in confusion coloured fiery red,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-272" id="noteref-272" epub:type="noteref">272</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in one pocket of the <i xml:lang="pl">frac</i> concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both hands. He stepped as though through rods, through whispers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mockings, shame enduring for the <i xml:lang="pl">frac</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As for an evil deed. At last he met</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eyes of Matthew, and with fear he trembled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matthew till then had been the Regent’s friend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now on him such a sharp and savage glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned, that pale the Regent grew, began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fasten close his buttons, thinking Matthew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would strip him of the <i xml:lang="pl">frac</i> by looks alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dobrzynski only twice said loudly, “Fool!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But such his anger at the Regent’s dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he at once from table rose, without</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave-taking made his exit, and on horseback</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounting, returned unto his farmstead home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But in the meantime did the Regent’s love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair Telimena, all her beauty’s splendours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of her dress display, from head to foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in the newest fashion. What her dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or head adornment seemed, ’twere vain to write;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pen could not exhaust them, only might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pencil trace those tulles, those blondes, cashmeres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those pearls and precious stones, and rosied cheeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And lively glances.</span>
					<span>Instantly the Count</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had recognised her; with astonishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All pale he rose from table, sought his sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And is it thou?” he cried, “or do mine eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deceive me? Thou, who in my presence claspest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stranger’s hand? O faithless being! thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most changeful soul! Thou dost not hide with shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy face beneath the earth? Thus art thou mindless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of such late vows? How credulous I was!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore have I these ribbons worn? But woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the rival who affronts me thus!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shall not to the altar pass, except</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Upon my corpse.”</span>
					<span>The guests arose, the Regent</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confounded greatly; to appease the rivals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain makes haste. But Telimena,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading the Count aside: “As yet,” she whispered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Regent has not taken me to wife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you will hinder it, pray tell me so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But answer me at once, and in few words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you do love me? have you hitherto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not changed your heart? are you prepared to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To marry me? at once? to-day? and if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You will, I’ll leave the Regent.” Said the Count:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O woman! unto me not understood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once in thy sentiments thou wast a poet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now to me thou seemest nought but prose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What are your marriages, if aught but chains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That only fetter hands, and bind not souls?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believe me, they are only declarations</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without confession; they are obligations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which bind not! Two hearts at the world’s far ends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burning, converse like stars with trembling beams.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who knows? maybe for this cause towards the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth aye presses, and is therefore ever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So dear unto the moon; eternally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gaze upon each other, and for aye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste by the shortest way each other toward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never can approach”⁠—“Enough of this,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She interrupted; “I am not a planet!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Heaven’s sake enough, Count! I am a woman.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know the rest already. Cease to talk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me of things not here nor there. And now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I warn you, if you whisper but one word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break my wedding off, as true as God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In heaven is, I with these nails will spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At you, and”⁠—“I will not,” the Count replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Madam, disturb your happiness.” He turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away his eyes all full of scorn and grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as to punish his unfaithful love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took the daughter of the Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>For object of his steadfast fires.</span>
					<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Desired to make the angry youths agree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By wise examples; therefore he began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To adduce the wild-boar story in the woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Naliboko, and of <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span>’s quarrel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Prince Denassau. But the guests meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had left off eating ices, and they went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For coolness from the castle to the court.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There had the peasantry their feast concluded:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pitchers of mead were circling round; the music</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was tuning now, and calling to the dance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sought for Thaddeus, who stood apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whispered something to his future wife:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sophia, I must now in a thing of weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take counsel with thee; I have asked my uncle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he has no objection. Thou dost know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A large proportion of those villages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall possess, according to the law</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revert to thee; these peasants are not mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are thy subjects; I should never dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispose of them without their lady’s will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when we have a Fatherland beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall villagers enjoy this happy change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By so much only, that it gives to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another master? True it is, till now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have been ruled with kindliness, but after</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My death who knows how I shall leave them? I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A soldier am, and we are mortal both.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am a man, I fear my own caprices.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More safely shall we do, if we renounce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such rule, and give up the serfs’ destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the protection of the law. Ourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now free, let us the serfs make also free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us bestow on them in heritage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The holding of these lands where they were born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That by a work of blood they have obtained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I must warn thee, that these lands bestowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our revenue will lessen, we must live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On moderate fortune. I to frugal life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am used from childhood; but for thee, Sophia?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art of noble lineage, thou hast spent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy childhood in the capital; canst thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agree to dwell here in the country, thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the world, and as a country woman?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To this Sophia answered modestly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I am a woman; counsel unto me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does not belong, and you will be my husband.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am too young for counsel. What you do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that I shall agree with all my heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If, Thaddeus, thou becomest poorer for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delivering the serfs, thou wilt be all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dearer to my heart. I little know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About my lineage, and I little care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About it: I remember only this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I was a poor orphan, and adopted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>, as a daughter cherished</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within their house, and thence in marriage given.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I do not fear the country; if I once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lived in a great town, it is long ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have forgotten it;⁠—I always loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The country, and believe me, that my cocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hens amused me more than Petersburg;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if at times I longed for entertainments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And company, it was from childishness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now I know the city wearies me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Last winter a short stay in Wilna taught me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I was born for country life. Amid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amusements still I longed for <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor fear I work, for I am young and strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know how to go round the house, and how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To carry keys, and thou shalt see how I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Will learn housekeeping.”</span>
					<span>When Sophia had spoken</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These last words, came towards her the astonished</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sour Gervasy. “I know all,” he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Judge has spoken of this liberty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet I do not understand what this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can have to do with serfs. I fear me lest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis something German. Liberty indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not a thing for peasants, but for nobles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis true that we from Adam all descend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I have heard that peasants come from Ham,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-273" id="noteref-273" epub:type="noteref">273</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Jews from Japhet, we nobility</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Shem, and thus as elders rule o’er both;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet otherwise the parish priest now teaches.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He says that it has been so formerly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the ancient dispensation; but</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Christ our Lord, though He from kings descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was born among the Jews in peasants’ stable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He levelled all ranks, and made them agree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so thus let it be, if it may not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be otherwise! Above all, as I hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My lady, most Illustrious and Powerful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia, does agree to all. ’Tis hers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give command, mine to obey. But only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I warn you, let us give not merely empty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And verbal freedom,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-274" id="noteref-274" epub:type="noteref">274</a> as among the Russians,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Pan Karp late deceased did free his serfs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a triple tax the Muscovites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought them to famine. Therefore I advise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That by an ancient custom we ennoble</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peasants, and proclaim we give to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our crest. My lady on some villages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confer her Half-goat, <span xml:lang="pl">Pan Soplica</span> share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Leliwa with others. That once done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Rembajlo</span> owns the peasant as his equal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he beholds him nobleman, Most Powerful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With coat-of-arms. The Diet will confirm it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But let my lady’s husband have no fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That giving of the lands will make you poor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbid it, heaven! that I should ever see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hands of daughter of a dignitary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cumbered with household labours. There are means</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hinder this. I know a treasure-chest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the castle, which contains the plate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span>, likewise signet-rings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Medals and jewels, and rich plumes and trappings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of horses, wondrous sabres, treasure of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pantler, in the ground preserved from plunder.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lady Sophia as inheritrix</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Possesses it. I watched it in the castle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ’twere the apple of my eye I kept it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Russians, and from you, <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span> too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have a great bag full of mine own ducats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Besides, collected from my salaries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Also from gifts of lords. I thought whene’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The castle was restored to us, to use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The money for repairing of the walls:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day for the new housekeeping it seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Useful at last. Then, <span xml:lang="pl">Pan Soplica</span>, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transfer myself to your house, in my lady’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll live upon the bread of favour, cradling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span> the third generation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the Penknife mould my lady’s child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ’tis a son;⁠—but it a son will be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wars are coming, and in time of war</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Those born are always sons.”</span>
					<span>Gervasy scarce</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These last words spake, when with slow, solemn steps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approached Protasy. Bowing low, from forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bosom of his <i xml:lang="pl">kontusz</i> he produced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A monstrous panegyric,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-275" id="noteref-275" epub:type="noteref">275</a> written on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two folios and a half. It was composed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rhyme by a young under-officer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in the capital had formerly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Written some famous odes, and then put on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The uniform; but being in the army</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still a belle-lettrist, he made verses still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> now had read three hundred through;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till coming to this place, “O thou whose charms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wake painful bliss and rapturous alarms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When on Bellona’s ranks thy countenance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou turnest, straight are shivered sword and lance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let Hymen vanquish Mars, and haste to tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Discord’s front the hissing vipers there”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia and Thaddeus clapped unceasingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though they praised it, in reality</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not wishing to hear more. Already by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commandment of the Judge the parish priest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the table mounted, and proclaimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The will of Thaddeus to the peasantry.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Scarcely the serfs had heard this news, they sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their young lord, fell at their lady’s feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Health to our lord and lady!” they exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tears. “Health to our fellow-citizens,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried Thaddeus; “free and equal! Poles!” “I give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The People’s health!” <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span> said. The people</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried out, “Long live the generals! long live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The army! live the people! all the states!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thousand voices rang alternate healths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone deigned Buchman not to share this joy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He praised the project, but would gladly see it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quite otherwise, and first appoint a legal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Commission which should⁠—</span>
					<span>Shortness of the time</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prevented justice doing to Buchman’s counsel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in the castle courtyard stood already</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Couples for dancing; officers with ladies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The common soldiers with the peasant women.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A Polonaise!” all cried out with one voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The officers had brought the army music,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the Judge whispered to the General:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Give orders, sir, the band shall yet stay back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This day is the betrothal of my nephew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’tis an ancient custom of our house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be betrothed and wed to village music.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look, here the cymbalist, the fiddler stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And piper;⁠—honest folks! the fiddler now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands eager, and the piper bows, entreating</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With glance of eyes. Should I them send away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’d weep, poor fellows. And the people cannot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring to another music. Let them now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begin, and let the people all rejoice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And later on we’ll hear your chosen band.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He gave the sign.</span>
					<span>The fiddler of his coat</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tucked up the sleeves, he tightly grasped the neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the fiddle-head he leaned his chin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a horse in full career set off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the fiddle; at this sign the pipers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stood beside, as though they flapped with wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With frequent motion of their shoulders blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the bags, and fill their cheeks with breath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou might’st have thought the pair would fly away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the air, like Boreas’ wingèd children.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Cymbals were wanting.</span>
					<span>Cymbalists were many;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But none dared play while <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span> was near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span> tarried all the winter through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None knew; now all at once he had appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the chief army staff. All knew that none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were equal to him on this instrument</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In taste and talent. They entreated he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would play, presented cymbals, but the Jew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refused, and said his hands were coarsened, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was out of practice, dared not, was ashamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To play before the gentlemen; he bowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And went away. When this Sophia saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She ran up to him, and in her white hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bars wherewith the master sounds the strings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She offered; with the other hand she stroked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man’s hoary beard, and curtsying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do, <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span>,” says she, “if you please, to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is my betrothal, <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span>, do play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You have promised oft to play upon my wedding.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span> loved Sophia exceedingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He nodded with his chin, in sign he did not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refuse, and so they led him to their midst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gave to him a chair, they bring the cymbals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And place them on his knees. He looks with joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pride on them, like veteran called to arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose grandsons from the wall his heavy sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag down; the old man laughs, although so long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sword was in his hand, yet has he felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hand is yet no stranger to the sword.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile two scholars by the cymbals kneel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attune the strings once more, and tuning strike.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span> is silent yet, with half-shut eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still his fingers grasp the unmoving bars.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-276" id="noteref-276" epub:type="noteref">276</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He let them go. At first they beat the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a triumphal march; more frequent, then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They smote along the strings like stormy rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All marvelled. But this only was as proof;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For soon he broke off, and aloft he raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Both bars.</span>
					<span>He played again. The bars vibrate</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such light motion, as a fly’s wing might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the chords, emitting a low hum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce heard. The master ever looked towards heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awaiting inspiration. From above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked, the instrument with proud glance scanned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He raised his hands together, dropped, and smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With those two bars. The hearers marvelled much.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From many strings together burst a sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a whole band of Janissary music</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awoke with bells, with <i xml:lang="pl">zel</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-277" id="noteref-277" epub:type="noteref">277</a> and beating drums;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Polonaise of May the third. The lively</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maidens breathe hard with joy, the lads may scarce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stay in their places. But the old men’s thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were with the sound transported to the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into those happy years when deputies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And senators upon the third of May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the town-hall did feast the king, made one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now with the nation, when in dance they sung:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Long live the King, the Diet live, the Estates, the Nation long!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The master hurries evermore the time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Intensifies the tones; but at that instant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threw in a false chord like a serpent’s hiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or scratch of iron on glass; all horror seized,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all their joy an evil-boding fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confounded, saddened, frightened all the hearers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They doubted: was the instrument mistuned?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In error the musician? Such a master</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not mistake. He purposely has stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again that traitorous string, the melody</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is troubled; ever louder, breaketh in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That chord unbridled, all confederate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the concord of the other tones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> understood the master;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He covered with his face his hands, and cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I know, I know that sound, ’tis <span xml:lang="pl">Targowica</span>!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And presently that string ill-boding burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With hissing.</span>
					<span>The musician to the treble</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushes, he breaks the time, confuses it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He leaves the treble, rushes to the bass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And evermore and louder still are heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand uproars; beating of a march,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of war, assault, and storm; then shots were heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The groans of children, and their mothers weeping.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The perfect master so the horrors gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of storming, that the village women trembled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recalling to themselves, with tears of pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Praga carnage, which they knew from songs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stories. Glad they were that suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The master thundered loud with all the strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strangled all the voices, as though he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Had beat them to the ground.</span>
					<span>The hearers scarce</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had time to issue from astonishment;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again another music; once again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first a humming light and low, there sigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some slender strings, like flies, who strive to loose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Themselves from nets of spiders. But the chords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Increase aye more and more. The scattered tones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unite, and legions gather of accords;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, with sounds accordant, move in time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tune creating of that famous song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of how the soldier over hills and forests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goeth, at times well-nigh with hunger dying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falling at last before his charger’s feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who with his foot shall dig for him a grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancient song to Poland’s army dear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-278" id="noteref-278" epub:type="noteref">278</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soldiers knew it; all the faithful ranks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered around the master, listening.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They to themselves recall that fearful time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When o’er their country’s grave they sang that song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And went into the country of the world.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-279" id="noteref-279" epub:type="noteref">279</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thought they track their years of wandering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er lands, o’er seas, through burning sands and frost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid strange peoples, where so oft in camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This native song rejoiced and heartened them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus thinking, sadly they bowed down their heads.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But soon they raised them. For the master raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tones, intensified and changed the time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaiming somewhat else; he scanned the strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He joined his hands, and smote with both the bars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So artful was the stroke, and of such power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the strings sounded forth like brazen trumpets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the trumpets the triumphal march</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolled toward the sky, “Yet Poland is not dead!</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span>! march to Poland!” and all clapped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all in chorus, “March! <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span>!” cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The master, as though marvelling at his song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dropped from his hands the bars, and raised his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On high; his cap of fox-skin from his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell on his shoulders, and his reverend beard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waved, lifted high; upon his cheek there stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Circles of wondrous red, and in his glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All full of spirit, shone the glow of youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till when the old man turned his eyes upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span>, with his hands he covered them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath his hands a flood of tears poured forth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“General!” he cried, “long has our Litva waited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thee, as we Jews our Messiah await!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long singers ’mid the people have foretold thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heaven proclaimed thee by a miracle!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live thou, and fight!⁠—Oh! thou, our”⁠—speaking he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept sobbing, for the honest Jew our country</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loved like a Pole. <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span> gave his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him, and thanked him. He, his cap removed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Did kiss the leader’s hand.</span>
					<span>The Polonaise</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall now begin. The Chamberlain does rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lightly throwing back his <i xml:lang="pl">kontusz</i> cuffs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And twirling his moustache, presents his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Sophia, and bowing courteously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invites her into the first couple. Following</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain, there forms a rank in pairs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The signal given, the dance begins; he leads.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon the turf the red boots shine, there gleams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lustre from the sabre, the rich girdle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shines brightly; but he slowly steps as though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwilling: but from every step, each motion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dancer’s thoughts and feelings may be read.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See, now he stands, as he would ask his lady;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bends towards her, whispers in her ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lady turns her head away, seems bashful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She listens not; he takes his cap off, bends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Humbly; the lady deigns to cast a glance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But keeps a silence obstinate; he tracks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her glances with his eyes, and laughs at length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glad of her answer; quicker steps he forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks down upon his rivals; and his cap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With heron’s plumes, now on his brow suspends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now shakes it o’er his forehead, till he lays it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon one side, and twirls round his moustache.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He goes, all envy him, rush on his traces;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gladly with his lady would escape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the crowd, at times stands in his place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And courteously he lifts his hand, and that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They would approach him humbly doth entreat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times he thinks with skill to turn aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changeth the path, glad to mislead the rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with swift step importunate they follow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he grows angry, and his right hand lays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his sword-hilt, while he seems to say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I care not for you! to the envious woe!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turns, with pride upon his brow, and with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defiance in his eye, straight through the crowd;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crowd of dancers dare not him approach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They yield to him the way, and change their ranks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Once more pursuing him.</span>
					<span>And loud applause</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resounds on all sides: “Ah! that is the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe! look, look, young people, ’tis perhaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last who thus can lead a Polonaise!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pairs still followed pairs with noise and joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The circle now unwound, now wound again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a giant snake in thousand folds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And change the varied, many hues of dresses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ladies, lords, and soldiers, like its scales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleaming, and gilded by the western sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the dark cushion of the turf. The dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is seething, music sounding, healths and plaudits.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone the Corporal Dobrzynski Bustard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears not the band, nor dances, nor rejoices.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hands behind his back he standeth, cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gloomy, thinking of his former suit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Sophia, how he loved to bring her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowers, weave her baskets, capture birds’ nests, carve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earrings! Ungrateful girl! Although he lavished</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many gifts upon her, though she fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him, though his father did forbid him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He yet how often on the garden wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat, to gaze while she her garden weeded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or gathered cucumbers, or cockerels fed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ungrateful girl! He drooped his head at last;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He whistled a mazurka, then he pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hat upon his ears, and to the camp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went, where stood the watch beside the guns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to distract his mind he played at draughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With soldiers, with the bowl his grief assuaged.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such, for Sophia, Dobrzynski’s constancy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sophia dances joyously, but though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the first couple, scarcely seen from far.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the green surface of the courtyard wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dress of green adorned with field-flowers, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In flowery garland, ’mid the flowers and grasses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She circles round, in flight invisible,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dance directing as an angel guides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The course of nightly stars. Thou guessest where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is, for all the eyes are turned towards her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All arms are stretched forth, towards her all the crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do press. The Chamberlain in vain does strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stay beside her; envious men have now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repulsed him from the first place, and the happy</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span> might not long rejoice himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yield her to another; and a third</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already hastened, and this one repulsed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once departed hopeless. Then Sophia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already wearied out, met Thaddeus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turn, and fearful of a further change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wishing to remain with him, she ended</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dances, and towards the table went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To fill up goblets for the guests.</span>
					<span>The sun</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had set already; warm the evening was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stilly; heaven’s circle here and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was paved with clouds, above of bluish hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rosy towards the west; these clouds forebode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fine weather, light and shining; there like flock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sheep that slumber on the grass, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are lesser clouds like flocks of water-fowl;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the west a cloud like veilly curtains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transparent, in deep folds; above like pearl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the borders gilded; in its depths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of purple hue; yet with the western blaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It sparkled, and it glowed, till gradually</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It grew more yellow, paler, and then grey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun has drooped his head, the cloud removed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And giving one sigh with the warm air, slept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But evermore the nobles drink, with healths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Napoleon, to the generals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thaddeus and Sophia, and at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turn of all three couples then betrothed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the guests there present, all invited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All friends whom living any one recalled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those now dead whose memory was holy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And I myself was there among the guests:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-280" id="noteref-280" epub:type="noteref">280</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>I drank the wine and mead, and what I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heard there I have written in a book.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
