<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book X: Emigration—Jacek</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Emigration⁠—<span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span></p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Council concerning the safety of the victors⁠—Conventions with <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>⁠—Leave-takings⁠—Important disclosure⁠—Hope.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Those morning clouds, erst scattered like black birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soaring in heaven’s highest region, now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together gathered closer. Scarce the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had from the south descended, than their flock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had with a mighty cloud all heaven o’erspread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind with ever greater swiftness drove them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cloud grew ever thicker, lower hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till by one side half-severed from the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stooping towards the earth, and spread abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a great sail, all winds within itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathering, it flew through heaven from south to west</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came a while of silence, and the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood dumb and silent, as though mute with fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fields of corn, that first lay down on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shook again aloft their golden ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like billows seething, now unmoving stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gazed towards heaven, with upbristling straw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the green willows, and the poplars standing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the ways, that first like women mourning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside an open grave, their foreheads smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the earth, their long arms flung abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dishevelled on the wind their silvery hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, as though lifeless, with mute mourning gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stand like images of Niobe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone the trembling aspen shakes grey leaves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The cattle, used to turn home leisurely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now ran tumultuous, nor their guardian wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abandoning their pasture, home they fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bull the earth upturneth with his hoof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ploughs with his horn, and terrifies the herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With roar ill-boding; and the cow, who raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her large eyes only once unto the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her mouth in wonder opened wide, and drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deep sigh. And the hog behind did linger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dashed round, and gnashed his teeth, and from the corn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abstracted portions, and them snatched as food.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The birds lay hidden in the woods, beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thatch, and in deep places of the grass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rooks alone in troops surround the ponds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And walk about with slow and solemn steps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turning their black eyes to the clouds as black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their tongues forth putting from their dry, wide throats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, spreading wide their wings, await their bath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Last of the birds, unreachable in flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A daring swallow, like an arrow through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark cloud pierces, then like bullet falls.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The nobles in that very moment ended</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That horrid battle with the Muscovites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sought for shelter in the house and barns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They leave the field of battle, where full soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The elements in battle join.</span>
					<span>Towards</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The west, still golden, shone with gloomy gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth, a yellow red. The cloud already</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its shades outspreading, like a net in form⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did apprehend the remnants of the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flew behind the sun, as though to seize him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the west. Some few storms whistled through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The air below, one after other flying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And casting drops of rain, great, bright, and round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As grain-like hail.</span>
					<span>The storm-winds suddenly</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grappled together, broke in twain; they struggled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whirled in whistling circles o’er the ponds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Troubling their waters to their very depth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fell upon the meadows, whistling loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through osiers and through grass; the osier boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asunder crack, and blades of grass fly wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the winds, like handfuls of torn hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mixed with the ringlets of the corn-sheaves. Loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winds did howl, fell on the plain, contended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roared, tore up furrows; made an opening for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A third, which from the field itself up-tore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like column from the dark earth, rose up, rolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round like a moving pyramid; its head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep burrowed in the ground, and from its feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast sand in the stars’ eyes; at every step</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It swelled out broadly, shot up tall aloft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blew a storm upon its mighty trumpet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till in this chaos of water and of dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of straws, and leaves and branches, torn-up turf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The storms upon the forest smote, and roared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within its deepest wilderness like bears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now as from a sieve plashed down the rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unceasing, in thick falling drops. And then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thunders roared, the drops together ran.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now like straight cords with tresses long they bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heavens to the earth. Now forth they burst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from a pail in watery strata. Now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both heaven and earth are totally concealed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Night darkens them, with storm more dark than night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times the horizon bursts from end to end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the storm-angel, like a mighty sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unveils the lightnings of his countenance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, covered with a pall, retires again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In heaven, and shuts its doors with thunder noise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again the storm gains strength, tempestuous rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heavy darkness, thick, nigh tangible;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more a stiller rain doth murmur, sleeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thunder for a moment; once more wakes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It roareth loud, and waters plash, till all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is peaceful. Only trees around the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rustled, and rain was softly murmuring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On such a day, the fiercest storm was welcome;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the tempest, covering o’er the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With twilight, deluged all the roads, and broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bridge that spanned the river; of the farm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fortress inaccessible it made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that which happened in <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>’s camp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day no rumour through the neighbourhood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could circulate; and at the present time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles’ fate upon a secret hung.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Counsels of weight pend in the Judge’s room.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bernardine lay wearied on the bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale, stained with blood, but wholly sound in mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gives commands, the Judge exact fulfils;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entreats the presence of the Chamberlain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summons the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> there to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commands. The door then closes. One whole hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These secret conversations lasted, till</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With these words Captain Rykow broke them off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bag with ducats heavy throwing down⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ye Polish sirs, among you is a saying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That every Muscovite’s a thief. Say ye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever asks, you know a Muscovite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Named <span xml:lang="pl">Nikita Nikiticz Rykow</span>, captain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a band, who gained eight medals and three crosses⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pray you to remember that⁠—this medal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At <span xml:lang="pl">Oczakow</span>, this one at Ismail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This for the fight at Novi, and this one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At <span xml:lang="pl">Preussisch-Eylau</span>, this at <span xml:lang="pl">Korsakow</span>’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Famous retreat from Zurich,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-233" id="noteref-233" epub:type="noteref">233</a> and I gained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Likewise a sword for courage shown, likewise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three testimonials of his satisfaction</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the Field-Marshal, by the Emperor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times commended, four times mentioned, all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In writing”⁠—</span>
					<span>“But, but, Captain,” Robak spoke,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whatever will become of us, if you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt not be reconciled? Indeed, you have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given us your word to simplify this thing.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“True, and I pledge my word to you again,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Says <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>; “here’s my word! What good would come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ruining you? I am an honest man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love you, Lachy, gentlemen, for you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are merry folk, good at a drinking-bout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gallant folk too, good at fighting out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have a Russian proverb, ‘He who rides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the wagon, oft is used to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the wagon;’ ‘Who to-day is foremost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow’s in the rear;’ ‘To-day thou beatest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow thou art beaten.’ Is that cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For anger? That is how we soldiers live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why such great malice should a man conceive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or angry be at losing? All that work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At <span xml:lang="pl">Oczakow</span> was bloody, and at Zurich</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They slew our infantry; at Austerlitz</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I lost my whole band; but before that time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did your <span xml:lang="pl">Kosciuszko</span> at <span xml:lang="pl">Raclawice</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-234" id="noteref-234" epub:type="noteref">234</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Where I was sergeant) mow down my platoon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With scythes. But what of that? Then I again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Maciejowice,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-235" id="noteref-235" epub:type="noteref">235</a> slew with mine own hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two valiant nobles; one was <span xml:lang="pl">Mokronowski</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He with his scythe had come before our front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cut off from a cannonier his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grasping the match. Oh! oh! ye Lachy! Country!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel all that. I, <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>⁠—Still the Czar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commands this, but I pity you. What should</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lachy be to us? For Muscovites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muscovia; Poland for the Poles;⁠—but then⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The Czar will not allow it!”</span>
					<span>Unto him</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge replies: “Sir Captain, that thou art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An honest man, the country-folks have seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mid whom so many years you have been quartered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be you not angry at this gift, good friend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We would not work you wrong; these ducats here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We ventured to subscribe, as knowing you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Art not a rich man.”</span>
					<span>“Ah! the <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i>,” cried</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rykow; “the whole band run through! my division!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that Plut’s fault. He was in command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he must answer to the Czar for this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you take back your money, gentlemen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have indeed but wretched captain’s pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’tis enough to give me punch and pipe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you I like, since I have drunk with you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eaten. I’ll be merry, chatter, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus will I live. But I’ll be your defence;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as there will be inquest, on my word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of honour, I will give my witness for you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we came here upon a visit, drank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And danced together, somewhat tipsy got,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Plut by chance commandment gave to fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so we fought, and wasted the battalion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You, sirs, grease the Commission well with gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twill soon despatch. But now I’ll tell you this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which to this nobleman I said before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wears the lengthy rapier; in command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plut was the first, I second; Plut remains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alive, perhaps he’ll bend you such a hook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you will perish, he’s a cunning blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You must with bank-notes gag him. Well then, now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir noble, thou with the long rapier, hast thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seen Plut already, taken counsel with him?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gervasy looked round, and his bald crown stroked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a careless gesture waved his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As by this sign he gave to them to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he had made all easy. Rykow still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insisted. “What, will Plut be silent? has he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then given his word?” The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, vexed that <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tormented him with questions, bent his finger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To earth most solemnly, then waved his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though he cut all further talk in twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said, “I by the Penknife swear that Plut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will let out nothing. He will nevermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Converse with any one.” Then dropped his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And snapt his fingers, as though shaking out</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Some secret from his hands.</span>
					<span>This darkling gesture</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hearers comprehended, and they stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wonder looking on each other, still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inquiring of this thing. Some minutes yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gloomy silence lasted, till at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Rykow, “Long the wolf has borne away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now is the wolf borne off!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-236" id="noteref-236" epub:type="noteref">236</a> The Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Requiescat in pace</i>” added. “Even in this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was,” said the Judge, “the finger of the Lord!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I am guiltless of this blood, I knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Not of it.”</span>
					<span>From the pillow started up</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The priest, and upright sat with gloomy cheer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Great sin an unarmed captive ’twas to slay!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christ forbids vengeance even on a foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fie! <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>! thou shalt answer heavily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this before the Lord. One reservation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone there is, if this committed were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for mere foolish vengeance, but instead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pro bono publico.” The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> nodded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waved his hand extended; murmuringly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repeated he, “Pro bono publico.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And no one after spoke of Major Plut;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sought him vainly on the morrow, in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mansion, vainly for the corpse proclaimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reward; the Major without trace was gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he had fallen in the water. What</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had come of him, were different stories told;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But none for certain knew nor then, nor after.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain with questionings did they torment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>; nought he said, except these words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pro bono publico.” The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the secret, but as he was bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By word of honour, the old man was silent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As though enchanted.</span>
					<span>After the conclusion</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of these conditions, <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> left the room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Robak all the warrior noblemen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commanded thither; and the Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Addressed them thus with great solemnity:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Brothers, the Lord has blessed our swords to-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But without reservation, I to you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must give to know that ill effects will come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From these unhappy wars. We all have erred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none of us here is without his fault;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friar Robak, that he spread too busily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The news abroad, the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> and the nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they misunderstood it. War with Russia</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot so quickly be begun. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in the battle took most active part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot with safety tarry here in Litva,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So must ye quickly to the Duchy fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matthew especially, the Baptist called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thaddeus and Razor, and the Bucket, bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their heads beyond the Niemen, where await them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our national hosts. We on you absent ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will lay the blame entirely, so shall we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Preserve the rest of all the family.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I bid ye farewell not for long. There are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most certain hopes that on us with the spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall brighten Freedom’s dawn, and Litva, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now bids farewell to you as exiles, soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall view you her triumphant rescuers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All necessaries for the road the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will furnish, and myself I will assist you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With money, as I can.”</span>
					<span>The nobles felt</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain had wisely counselled them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For well ’tis known that he who once has had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A difference with the Russian Czar, can ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be truly reconciled to him on earth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And either he must fight, or perish in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Siberia. Therefore without speaking they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazed sadly on each other, sighed, but as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A signing of consent they bowed their heads.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Pole, although among the nations famed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For love of native land exceeding life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is ready aye to leave it, and depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the world’s wide country, and to live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long years in poverty and in contempt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Battling with men and destiny, while still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This hope before him glimmers through the storm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>That yet he serves his Fatherland.</span>
					<span>They all</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Declared that they were ready to set out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once; alone this pleased not Master Buchman.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buchman, a prudent man, had mixed not in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle, but on hearing that they took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Counsel together, he made haste to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His own opinion. He approved the project,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But wished it were completely otherwise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would develop it more fully, would</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have it explained more clearly; first appoint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commission legally, that should consider</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The emigration’s aims, and means, and action;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many other things consider too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappily the shortness of the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prevented justice being done to Buchman’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advice. The nobles hastily took leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And were already starting.</span>
					<span>But the Judge</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stayed Thaddeus in the room, and to the priest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said, “Now ’tis time that I should tell to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That which since yesterday I learned for certain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Thaddeus loves Sophia truly. Let him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before departing, for her hand entreat her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I spoke to Telimena, she will not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be hindrance to us; likewise is Sophia</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conformable unto her guardians’ will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we may not in wreath of marriage join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day the couple, they at least to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother, may be affianced, ere he part;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since for young hearts and travellers, thou well knowest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What various temptations rise. But when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth shall cast his eyes upon the ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering he already is a husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once the fever of temptations strange</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is cool within him; the betrothal ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Believe me, has great power.</span>
					<span>“Myself, I had,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some thirty years ago, a great affection</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the fair Martha, and her heart I won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We were betrothed, but Heaven did not bless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our union, and soon left me desolate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taking the lovely <span xml:lang="pl">Wojszczanka</span> to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His glory, daughter of my friend <span xml:lang="pl">Hreczecha</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As memory of her virtues, of her charms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This gold betrothal ring alone remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me. As often as I looked thereon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My dead love stood before my eyes, and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Heaven’s grace I hitherto have kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My faith to my betrothed one, and though ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A husband, I am an old widower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> has another daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pretty enough, and like enough unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>My well-loved Martha.”</span>
					<span>Saying this he looked</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the ring with tenderness, and brushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tear off with his hand; then ended: “Brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What thinkest thou, shall we betroth the two?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loves, and I have the aunt’s word and the girl’s.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But up rushed Thaddeus, and earnestly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spoke thus: “How can I show my gratitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my dear uncle, who so constantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinks of my happiness! Ah! dearest uncle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I were the happiest of men, if now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia were betrothed to me, if I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could know she was my future wife; and yet⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll say it openly-to-day these spousals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not be done, for this are many reasons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask me no more. If Sophia deigns to wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She maybe will behold me better, worthier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe by steadfastness I shall deserve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her love; maybe a little glory may</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adorn my name. Maybe we shall return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon to our native region. Then, my uncle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall recall your promise to you, then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon my knees salute my dear Sophia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if she still be free, entreat her hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now must I part from Litva, it may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For long, perhaps another may meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commend him to Sophia. I will not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Constrain her will, to beg return of love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I have not deserved, were mean and base.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And as the young lad spoke thus feelingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like two great pearl-drops glittered two bright tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his large blue eyes, and ran together</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Swift down his blushing countenance.</span>
					<span>But curious,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia from the depths of the alcove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had heard this secret discourse, and she heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Thaddeus simply thus and boldly spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His love; the heart within her trembled; she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw only those two large tears in his eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although she might not track his secret’s thread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore he loved her, why abandoned her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or whither he departed, yet this parting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much saddened her. The first time in her life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She from a young man’s lips had heard the great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wondrous tidings that she was beloved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So ran she to a little household shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefrom an image and a reliquary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She took; the picture was <abbr>St.</abbr> Genevieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the reliquary was a shred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of holy Joseph’s coat, the lover, patron</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of youth betrothed; and with these holy things</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>She entered the apartment.</span>
					<span>“Are you going</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So quickly? I will give you for the journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little present, and a warning too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carry this relic with you always, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This picture, and remember still Sophia.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May the Lord God in health and weal conduct you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quickly bring you back to us in joy!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent she stood, and drooped her head, while half</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed her blue eyes, and liberal tears ran forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From underneath the lashes; and Sophia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing with eyelids closed, kept silence still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Pouring down tears like diamonds.</span>
					<span>Thaddeus, taking</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gifts, and on her hand a kiss imprinting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said, “Lady, I must bid farewell to you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell, remember me, and deign at times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To say a prayer for me, Sophia!” More</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He could not say.</span>
					<span>But unexpectedly</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count and Telimena coming in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Observed the youthful lovers’ tender parting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count, much moved, at Telimena looked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said, “What beauty even in a scene</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So simple! when a shepherdess’s soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must with a warrior’s part, even as a boat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parts from a ship in tempest! Truly, nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can kindle tenderness within the heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when heart parts from heart. Time is like wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It but extinguishes a feeble light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A great fire flames but stronger from the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart can love more strongly from afar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>, I have held thee for a rival,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this mistake of our sad variance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which forced me to draw sword on you, one cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has been. I see my error, since thou for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepherdess didst sigh, but I had given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart to this fair nymph. Let our offences</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be drowned in blood of foes. We will not strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With murderers’ swords against each others’ lives.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let otherwise our lovers’ quarrel be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decided; let us strive who shall excel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In strength of love! Let us both leave behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The objects dear unto our hearts, and let us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both hasten upon swords, on spears to rush.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us together strive in steadfastness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In woe, in sufferings, and with valiant arm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursue our foes.” He spoke, on Telimena</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked, but she replied not, sore amazed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But, Count,” the Judge broke in, “wherefore must you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Depart, of such necessity? Believe me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You may in safety dwell upon your lands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The government may strip and scourge the poor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobility, but you are certain, Count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whole to remain. You know how high your rank;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are tolerably rich; with half your income</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>You may redeem yourself from prison.”</span>
					<span>“That,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count replied, “agrees not with my mood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I may be no lover, I will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hero. For the cares of love I summon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The comforters of glory; if I am</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A beggar of the heart, I will be great</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In arms!”</span>
					<span>Said Telimena: “What debars you</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From love and happiness?” “My destiny’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Power,” said the Count; “the darkness of forebodings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That by mysterious movement swiftly rush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To foreign regions, unaccustomed deeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I own I wished in Telimena’s honour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To light the flame to-day at Hymen’s altar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But an example far too beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This young man gives me, of his own free will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tearing his nuptial garland off, and rushing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To prove his heart in accidents of fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changing, and in the bloody chance of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day for me likewise an epoch new</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is opening. The sounding of my sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Birbante-Rocca once did echo back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, may its sound through Poland spread as well!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ended, on his sword-hilt proudly smote.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To blame. “Ay!” Robak spoke; “such goodwill hard it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ride off, and money take with thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou mayest perhaps equip a band of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like <span xml:lang="pl">Wladimir Potocki</span>, who amazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Frenchmen, giving to the treasury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A million; like Prince Dominic <span xml:lang="pl">Radziwill</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who pledged his lands and furniture, and armed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two regiments of horse. Ride off, and take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Money; we now enough of hands possess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But there is want of money in the Duchy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ride ye away, we take our leave of you.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With sad eyes Telimena on him glanced.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Alas!” she said, “I see nought will restrain thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hero! when thou enterest warlike lists</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy love’s colour turn a tender glance.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus saying, a ribbon from her dress she took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She fashioned therewith a cockade, and pinned it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Count’s bosom. “Let this colour lead thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the fiery cannon, shining spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rain of bullets; when by valiant deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou winnest glory, and with deathless laurels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt enwreathe thy bloodstained helm and crest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With victory proud, ev’n then turn thou thine eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this cockade. Remember thou whose hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fastened that colour there.” She reached her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him. The Count then, kneeling, kissed that hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Telimena to one eye approached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her handkerchief, but with the other looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From high upon the Count, who bade farewell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most deeply moved. She sighed-but-shrugged her shoulders.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But said the Judge, “Sir Count, make haste, ’tis late;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Friar Robak cried, with threatening mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Enough of this! make haste!” The orders thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both of the Judge and of the priest divide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loving pair, and drive them from the room.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime did Thaddeus embrace his uncle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tears, and Robak’s hand kissed. Robak pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his bosom the lad’s forehead, laying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands in form of cross upon his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked up to heaven, and said, “My son! depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With God!” and wept. But Thaddeus already</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had passed the threshold. “What!” then asked the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Will you not tell him, brother, anything?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, poor boy, shall he learn nothing, ere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He part?”⁠—“No, nothing,” said the priest, long weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With face hid in his hands. “And wherefore should</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poor lad know that he a father has,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hid him from the world, as being a villain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And murderer? God knows, how I did long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell my son, but of this consolation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I make unto the Lord a sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To expiate my former crimes.”</span>
					<span>“Then,” said</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge, “ ’tis time to think now of thyself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consider at thine age, and in thy plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou couldst not with the others emigrate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou once did say thou knewest a house, where thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Couldst hide thyself. Say where? Let us make haste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A carriage waiteth ready harnessed. Was it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in the forest, in the keeper’s hut?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaking his head, said Robak, “ ’Twill be time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow. Now, my brother, send thou to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parish priest, that he may swiftly come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here with the sacrament. Send all from hence;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou only, with the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, here remain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Close thou the doors.”</span>
					<span>Robak’s commands the Judge</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fulfilled, and sat beside him on the couch;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy stood, and with his elbow leaned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his rapier’s hilt, and with his brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Supported on his hand.</span>
					<span>Robak, before</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke, his glance fixed on the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>’s face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kept mysterious silence. As a surgeon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a diseased body lightly lays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first his hand, ere he the sharp blade prove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Robak softened of his piercing eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glance severe; long o’er Gervasy’s face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He held them mute. At length, as he would give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blindfold the stroke, he covered with his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes, and with a powerful voice he said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“I am <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek Soplica</span>.”</span>
					<span>At these words</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale grew the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, forward bent, and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One half all stooping forward; stood, supported</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one foot, like a flying stone, from high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrested on its path; his eyes wide staring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lips wide apart, with white teeth threatening;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His whiskers bristling; from his hand the rapier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abandoned on the ground his knees held fast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His right hand, closely pressing, grasped the hilt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rapier from behind stretched after him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waved its long black extremity around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto each side. And like a wounded lynx</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> seemed, that from a tree will spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the hunter’s eyes; it puffs itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up in a ball; it growls, its bloodshot eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sparkles kindles, moves its whiskers, lashes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Its tail.</span>
					<span>“Rembajlo,” said the friar, “no more</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wrath of man affrights me, for I am</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already under God’s hand. I conjure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee in the name of Him who saved the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the cross did bless His murderers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And did accept the thief’s entreaty, that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt be pacified, and all that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall say wilt listen patiently. I have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confessed now whom I am, and for relief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of conscience I must seek, and must at least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For pardon pray. Thou listen my confession;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then after do thou what thou wilt with me.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here his hands he folded, as in prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, deep in thought, moved backward, smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His forehead, and his shoulders moved.</span>
					<span>The priest</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began the story to relate of his</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Familiar friendship with <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>, how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loved his daughter; from this cause proceeded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His quarrel with the Pantler. But he spoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With little order, mingling oft complaints</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lamentations in his story; often</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His speech broke off, as though he had ended it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And then again began.</span>
					<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, knowing</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most perfectly the annals of <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though tangled in disorder all this tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In memory could range, and fill it out;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But many things the Judge nought understood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both listened diligently, with bowed heads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span> ever spoke with freer words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oft broke off.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-237" id="noteref-237" epub:type="noteref">237</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Indeed, thou knowest too well, Gervasy, how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pantler oft invited me to banquets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would propose my health; not seldom cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifting his glass on high, he had no friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>. How he then embraced me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All who saw this would think he shared with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His very soul. A friend he! well he knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What at that time was passing in my soul!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Meanwhile the neighbourhood already whispered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such a one said to me: ‘Ah! <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain wouldst thou compete, the threshold of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dignitary is too high for <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Podczaszyc’</span> feet.’ I laughed, pretending I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughed at the magnates, and their daughters too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cared not for the aristocracy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That if I oft consorted with them, ’twas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From friendship; I would only take for wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of my own condition. Ne’ertheless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These jestings cut me to the quick. Young then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courageous, all the world to me was open.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this land, where, as well you know, a noble</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By birth may for the throne be candidate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With highest lords⁠—in truth <span xml:lang="pl">Tenczynski</span> once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did ask a daughter of a royal house,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-238" id="noteref-238" epub:type="noteref">238</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a king gave her to him without shame⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were not <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>’s honours equal with</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Tenczynski</span>’s, both by blood, and crest, and service</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To the Republic?</span>
					<span>“Ah! how easily</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man may ruin another’s happiness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one short moment, and may not repair it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all a long life! One word from the Pantler,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How happy we had been! who knows, maybe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We both had lived till now. Maybe, even he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside his darling child, his lovely Eva,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside his grateful son-in-law, had reached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A peaceful old age, and his grandchildren</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps had rocked. Now what has passed? He ruined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both of us, and himself!-That murderous deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the followings of that crime, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My woes and sins!⁠—I have no right to complain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was his murderer!⁠—I have no right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make complaint!⁠—I from my very heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do pardon him; but even he⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If one time merely he had openly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refused me! For he well knew what we felt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he had not received my visitings⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who knoweth how?⁠—I maybe had departed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been angry, railed against him, in the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neglected him. But he in cunning proud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought of a new idea; he made pretence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That such a thing had entered ne’er his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I could ever seek for such alliance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I was needful to him; I had weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the nobles, and the peasants all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loved me! As though he ne’er perceived my love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He welcomed me as erst, insisted ev’n</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should come more often. And as oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As we two were alone together, seeing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine eyes o’erclouded, and my breast o’ercharged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ready to break forth, the old man, cunning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would presently throw out indifferent words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lawsuits, diets, hunts⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah! o’er our cups, not seldom, when he thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would melt, when thus he pressed me, and assured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me of his friendship, having need of my</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sabre, or vote in Diet⁠—when I must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Press him in turn affectionately, then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such anger boiled in me, that I turned o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spittle in my mouth, and then my hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would grasp my sabre’s hilt;⁠—I longed to spit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon this friendship, and to draw my sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Eva, looking on my glance and posture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could guess, I know not how, what in me passed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She gazed imploringly, her cheeks grew pale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such a lovely dove, so gentle she⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such a sweet look had she⁠—so serene!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So angel-like! I know not even how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had no heart to anger her, to grieve her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I was silent!⁠—I, the brawler famous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throughout all Litva!⁠—I, who lived no day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without a fight, who never would submit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wrong, not merely at the Pantler’s hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But even at the king’s; whom slightest cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove into madness. I, though evil-minded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drunken, was as dumb as a young lamb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though I saw the Holiest⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How many times I longed to ope my heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even to prayer before him humble me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But gazing in his eyes I met a look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold as a stone. Ashamed of my emotion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was; I hastened once again, quite coldly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lawsuits, diets, to discourse, and even</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To jest! True, all from pride, not to debase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The name of the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>, not degrade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself before a lord by useless prayers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor earn refusal. For what would be said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the nobles, if they knew that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span> had refused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A maiden to <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>, and to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span><span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>, had offered the black broth!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-239" id="noteref-239" epub:type="noteref">239</a></span>
					<span>“At last,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not knowing how to act, I thought to gather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A slender regiment of the nobles, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leave for aye the district and my country;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere in Muscovy or Tartary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To go, and war begin. I rode to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave of the Pantler, in the hope that when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw his staunch supporter, his old friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Almost an inmate of his house, with whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had drunken, and made war through all those years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now bidding farewell, and into the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riding afar, the old man might be moved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And show me somewhat yet of human soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a snail his horns⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah! who, though but in his inmost heart’s depth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has but one spark of feeling for a friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But will this sparkle show on taking leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having his forehead for the last time touched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coldest eye will often shed a tear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The poor girl, hearing I should go away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew pale, unconscious, fell almost a corpse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nought could she say, until she poured a stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of tears! I saw how dear I was to her!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I recollect, the first time in my life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I burst in tears of joy and of despair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I longed again before her father’s feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fall, to wind like serpent round his knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crying, ‘Dear father, take me for thy son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or slay me!’⁠—Then the Pantler, solemnly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold as a pillar of salt, polite, unmoved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to speak; of what?⁠—his daughter’s wedding!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That moment!⁠—Thou, Gervasy, friend, consider;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Thou hast a human heart!</span>
					<span>“The Pantler said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘<span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>, unto me the Castellan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has sent betrothers; thou my friend art, what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sayest thou to this? Thou knowest that I have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A daughter fair and rich. The Castellan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is of <span xml:lang="pl">Witepsk</span>. True, in the Senate he has</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A low seat, unconfirmed. What counsel you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother?’ I cannot now at all remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What unto him I answered; possibly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing. To horse I mounted, and I fled.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“<span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>,” the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> said, “excuses wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou urgest, yet they lessen not thy fault.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For truly not once only in the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It has occurred that one who loved a daughter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lord or king, has tried by violent means</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To win her, thought of stealing her away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revenged him openly. But thus treacherous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death to inflict, upon a Polish lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Poland, and in concert thus with Russians!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No, not in concert,” <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span> said in grief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Carry her off by violence? True, I could</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have done so, could have snatched her from behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gratings and latches; could have ground to dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That castle of his; I had at my back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dobrzyn and four stout clans more. Ah! if she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been as our own noble ladies, strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And healthy; had she feared not flight, pursuit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And could she but have heard the clash of arms!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she, poor girl! so carefully her parents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had cherished her, that she was timid, weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A caterpillar, a spring butterfly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus to seize her, with an armèd hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To touch her, were to slay her! No! I could not!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revenge me openly, by storm to hurl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His castle into ruins? Shame! for men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would say that I revenged me for refusal!</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, thine honest heart can never feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What hell there lieth in offended pride.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Pride’s demon counselled me to better plans;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take a bloody vengeance, but conceal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cause of vengeance; not to visit more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The castle, root that love from out my heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To forget Eva, marry with another;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then to find out later some pretext,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revenge myself⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then seemed it to me, that my heart had changed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pleased I was with this imagining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And⁠—married me unto the first I met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A poor girl! Evil did I⁠—how I was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cruelly punished! For I loved her not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hapless mother of my Thaddeus!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me the most attached, most loving soul!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I within my heart my former love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And malice strangled. And I was as mad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain I forced myself to husbandry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or business, all in vain! For by a demon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of vengeance driven wild, bad, irritable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I found no comforting in aught on earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus I fell from sin to other sins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to drink.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And so my wife ere long of sorrow died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving that child; but me despair consumed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How dear I must have held my perished love!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many years! where have I not been? and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot yet forget her, and for aye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her loved form stands before my eyes, as painted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I drank; I could not for a moment drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mem’ry away, nor of it rid myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I have traversed o’er so many lands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now behold, in habit of a monk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am God’s servant, on this couch, in blood⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So long I have spoken of her!⁠—in this moment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak of such things! God will pardon me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You here must know in what despair and grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That crime was done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Twas shortly after her betrothal day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They talked of this betrothal everywhere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas said, when Eva from the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojewode</span>’s hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received the nuptial ring, she swooned, she fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a fever, that she had the symptoms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a consumption, that she ceaseless sobbed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas guessed she loved another secretly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still the Pantler, ever tranquil, merry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave in the castle balls, and gathered friends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me he invited not; in what could I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be useful to him? My misrule at home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wretchedness, my shameful custom, made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me as a scorn and laughter to the world;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who once, I well may say it, shook the whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>District; whom Radziwill<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-240" id="noteref-240" epub:type="noteref">240</a> beloved called;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, when I forth from out my farmstead rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went with a court more numerous than a prince;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when I drew my sword some thousand sabres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around were gleaming, frightening lordly castles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now the peasant children laughed at me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus sudden grew I vile in eyes of men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Jacek Soplica</span>! Who knows what is pride?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here feeble grew the Bernardine, and fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back on the couch. Then spoke the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, roused:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Great are Heaven’s judgments. True, true! so ’tis thou!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou art <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>! Thou <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>! under</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hood! thou livest as a beggar! Thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom I remember ruddy and in health,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A handsome noble, when the ladies praised thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When women raved about thee! Whisker-bearer!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not as thou wert in former days! thus hast thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grown old from sorrow! How did I not know thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After that shot, when thou didst hit the bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So perfectly? our Litva had no marksman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surpassing thee; thou also, after Matthew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wert with the sabre first! True, in past times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our noble ladies sang concerning thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Lo! <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span> twirls his whisker, all the regions shake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he for whom the whisker shall this twirling make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were he even Prince Radziwill, shall tremble for its sake.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou didst twirl it even for my lord!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappy one! ’Tis thou! brought to what state!</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span> the Whiskered is a begging friar!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great are Heaven’s judgments! And now, ha! ha! scatheless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou never shall come forth! I swear it, thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hast sucked <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>’s drops of blood away.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile the priest sat up upon the couch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ended thus: “I rode around the castle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many devils were there in my head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in my heart! who shall repeat their names?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pantler slayeth his own child. Already</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me has he slain, annihilated.’ Under</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The door I rode; some devil lured me there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look on his riot! Drunkenness each day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the castle, and how many lights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The windows show; what music in the halls!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will that castle not in ruins fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Upon his bald head?</span>
					<span>“Think of vengeance, swift</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will Satan give a weapon to thy hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce I imagined it, when Satan sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Muscovites! I stood on gazing. Thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Knowest how they stormed your castle.</span>
					<span>“But ’tis false</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I was in accord with Muscovites!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I gazed on. Various thoughts swarmed through my head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First with a foolish smile, as children look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On conflagration, gazed I; then I felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A murderer’s joy, and while I waited, swift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The castle walls began to burn and fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times the thought possessed me to rush in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rescue her, the Pantler even⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye did defend yourselves, thou knowest, bravely</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prudently. I marvelled. Round me fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Muscovites. Those cattle! ill they aim!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On viewing their disasters, once again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did spite possess me. Shall this Pantler be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Victorious, and shall all things in the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus prosper for him? And shall he come forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With triumph from this terrible attack?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I rode away in shame. Just then ’twas morn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then looked I up, I knew him. He came forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the balcony, his diamond clasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did in the sunlight glitter, and he twirled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His whisker proudly, and a proud glance threw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed that unto me especially</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bade defiance, that he knew me, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus stretched his hand towards me, mocking me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threatening. I a Russian’s rifle grasped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce pointed, scarce took aim, but off it went!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou knowest!⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Cursed be those firearms! He who slays with sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must place himself, attack and parry, turn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may disarm his foe, may stay the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-way; but with these firearms! ’tis enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To touch the lock! a moment? one sole spark!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Did I fly then, when thou took’st aim at me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From overhead? I fixed my eyes upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My gun’s two barrels; and some strange despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some wondrous sorrow, fixed me to the earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why then, alas! Gervasy, why didst thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then miss me? Thou hadst done me service thus!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But well it might be seen for expiation</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of sin ’twas needful”⁠—</span>
					<span>Here again he failed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For want of breath. “God knows,” the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I truly wished to hit thee! How much blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By that one shot of thine hast thou poured forth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many miseries fell on us, and on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine own race, all through thy fault, Master <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> for their target took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span>, although by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spindle side, thou didst him shield, and when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Muscovite did fire at me, thou didst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast me to earth, and thus didst save us both.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If true it is thou art a cloistered priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy frock alone protects thee from the Penknife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell, no more I’ll tarry on your threshold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us be quits, and leave to Heaven the rest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span> stretched forth his hand. Gervasy drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Backwards. “I cannot,” said he, “without shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my nobility, e’er touch a hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such a murder stained, from private vengeance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And not pro bono publico.”</span>
					<span>But <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span></span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sank from the pillows back upon the couch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turned towards the Judge, and ever paler,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asked anxiously about the parish priest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> called, “I do beseech you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you remain! I presently will end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I scarce have power sufficient.”</span>
					<span>“What, my brother!”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge exclaimed; “thy wound is not so grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What sayest thou of the parish priest? Perhaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was ill dressed. I’ll call the doctor here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Or in our store of medicines”⁠—The priest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke in: “My brother, ’twere in vain! It is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A former wound from Jena; ’twas ill-healed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now fresh opened; there is gangrene here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I understand wounds. Look how black the blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like pitch! What use the doctor here? but that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vain thing is! Once only can we die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give up our soul to-morrow, or to-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, wilt thou pardon me? I must</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Conclude⁠—</span>
					<span>“There is in this some merit, not</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To will to be a traitor to the nation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although the nation traitor thee proclaim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him, above all, in whom dwells such pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As dwelt in me.⁠—</span>
					<span>“The name of traitor clung</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me like pestilence. All patriots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did turn their faces from me; former friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled from me; he who timid was, afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saluted and avoided me; and even</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each wretched peasant, miserable Jew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although he bowed, did pierce me from aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mocking smile. The name of traitor rung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my ears, with echo did resound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At home, abroad. That word from morn till dusk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before me circled, as a spot before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An eye diseased. And yet no traitor was I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto my country”⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The Muscovites would gain me partisan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gave to the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span> a large share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the deceased man’s lands; and later on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Targowica</span> traitors<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-241" id="noteref-241" epub:type="noteref">241</a> wished to honour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me with an office. If I then had willed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Russianise myself, which Satan counselled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had by now most rich and powerful grown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had I become a Muscovite, the highest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magnates had sought my favour, even my brother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobles, and even the commonality,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who do so readily despise their own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgive those happier who serve Muscovy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew all that⁠—but yet⁠—I could not!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“From the land I fled⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where have I not been? what have I not suffered?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Until God deigned reveal the only cure:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must reform myself, and must repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As far as in my power might lie⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The Pantler’s daughter, with the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojewode</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her husband, somewhere in Siberia.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transported, there died early. In this country</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She left Sophia, her little daughter. I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commanded she should be adopted⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Maybe from foolish pride, far more than love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I slew; so must I show humility.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I went among the monks. I, once so proud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of race, I, who was as a blusterer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did bow my head, a friar; I called me Robak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since like a worm in dust⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That ill example for the Fatherland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encouragement to treason, it was needful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By good example to redeem, by blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By sacrifice⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I for my country fought; -but where I say not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas not for earthly glory that I rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So oft on swords and shot. To me more sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis to remember, not loud, valorous deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But silent actions, useful sufferings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which none⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Not one time only did I penetrate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto my country, bearing the commands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of generals, collecting information,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concluding treaties. The Galicians know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This monkish hood, the Poseners know it too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One year I laboured in a Prussian fortress;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times the Muscovites did wound my shoulders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sticks, once sent me to Siberia;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Austrians then in Spielberg buried me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To labour in their dungeons⁠—<i xml:lang="la">carcer durum</i>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lord by miracle delivered me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Permitting me to die among my people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the sacraments.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Perhaps ev’n now, who knows, maybe I sinned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe beyond the generals’ commands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hurried insurrection on. This thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span> house should arm the first⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My kinsmen the first Horseman should upraise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Litva⁠—this thought⁠—seemeth pure⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou didst desire revenge? Behold, thou hast it!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou wast instrument of God’s chastising;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven by thy means did cut my measures through.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou didst the thread so many years had spun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tangle; the great aim which consumed my life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My latest earthly feeling in the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I had cherished as my dearest child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou in its father’s eyes hast slain, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Forgive thee! Thou”⁠—</span>
					<span>“May Heaven forgive us both!”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> broke in. “If thou art about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take the sacrament, Friar <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am neither Lutheran, nor schismatic.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-242" id="noteref-242" epub:type="noteref">242</a> Who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afflicts the dying, I know sins heavily.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll tell thee somewhat that will sure rejoice thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When my deceasèd master wounded fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I bent o’er him, kneeling, and my sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steeped in his wound, and swore revenge, my lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did shake his head, his hand stretched towards the gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where thou wert, and in the air he signed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cross. He could not speak, but gave this sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he forgave his murderer. I this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did understand, but I so mad with rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was then, I ne’er a word spoke of this cross.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sick man’s sufferings here broke off discourse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one long hour of silence followed then.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They wait the priest. The sound of hoofs was heard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A breathless tenant at the chamber knocked.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bears a letter of importance, shows it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>’s self. Then Jacek to his brother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives it, and him desires to read aloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The letter was from Fisher, at that time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commanding in the staff of Poland’s army, under</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prince Joseph. He announced, that in the secret</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imperial cabinet was war declared;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Emperor now proclaims it to the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Diet is in Warsaw summoned, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The States Confederate of Masovia have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decreed the union of Litvania.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-243" id="noteref-243" epub:type="noteref">243</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>, in hearing, spoke a silent prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sacred taper pressing to his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He raised to heaven his eyes, alight with hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shed a flood of last and joyful tears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now, Lord,” he said, “let thou thy servant part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In peace.” All knelt; just then upon the threshold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bell did sound, a sign the parish priest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Had with the Host arrived.</span>
					<span>Night now had fled,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the milky heaven did course the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright, rosy sunbeams. Through the window-panes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fell like diamond arrows. On the couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They shone reflected from the sick man’s head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dressed in gold his brow and countenance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That like a saint he shone in fiery crown.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
