<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book VI: The Farmstead</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Farmstead<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-163" id="noteref-163" epub:type="noteref">163</a></p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The first warlike movements of the foray⁠—Protasy’s expedition⁠—Robak takes counsel with the Judge about the public cause⁠—Continuation of Protasy’s bootless errand⁠—Episode of the hemp⁠—The farmstead of the noble family of Dobrzyn⁠—Description of the homestead and person of Matthias Dobrzynski.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>From the damp twilight stole forth, dimly seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light without blushing, leading on the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lightless eye. The day had risen long since,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But scarce as yet was visible. A mist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung o’er the earth, as thatch of straw o’erhangs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A poor Litvanian hut; towards the east</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A circle somewhat whiter than the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun betokened, risen in the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence must he to the earth descend, but he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed joylessly, and slumbered on his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By heaven’s example all was late on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cattle to their pasture went forth late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stumbled on the hares, still feeding late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though used to come back to their groves at dawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day, enveloped in the rolling mists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some crunch the damp grass, others burrowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the field, in couples flock together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think to enjoy the open air betimes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they before the cattle must retreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Unto the forest.</span>
					<span>In the forests too</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was silence. The awakened bird sang not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shook his feathers clear of dew, and pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to the tree, and thrust his head again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath his wings, half-shut his eyes, and waited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun. On shores of water ’mid the mire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The storks do clatter with their beaks; the crows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit dripping wet, with large and open beaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And carry on their lengthy chatterings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hateful to farmers, prophets of the rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The husbandmen had long gone forth to work.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The reapers now began their ’customed song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Monotonous and gloomy, full of longing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a rainy day; the sadder sounding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As sinking without echo in the mist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sickles in the corn clashed, and the mead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resounded; in a row the mowers cut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The after-grass, and whistled loud their song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ending of each stanza they stand still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharpen the steel, and beat upon the hones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In time. The folk unseen in mist, alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sickles, scythes, and songs resounded, as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Music from voices of the invisible.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In midmost on a sheaf of corn, the bailiff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sitting, grew weary, turned around his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regarding not the labours; on the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked, upon the cross-ways, where there passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Some unaccustomed things.</span>
					<span>Upon the paths</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And highways, from the morning had there reigned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unusual movement. There was creaking loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peasant’s cart, that like a post did fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here a noble’s carriage rattling flew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It meets another, and a third. From left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There rode an envoy like a courier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many horses from the right-hand way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew, as though racing. All seemed hastening</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To various quarters. What may all this mean?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bailiff rose up from the sheaf, he wished</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look around him, and inquire. Long time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood upon the road, but called in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could not stay the course of any one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor in the mist could recognise a soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And horsemen flitted fast like spirits, only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time after time the hollow fall of hoofs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was heard, and stranger yet, the clash of sabres.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This much rejoices, but yet terrifies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bailiff’s heart; for though in Litva then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was peace, long time low murmurs went around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of war, the French, <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span>, of Napoleon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should then these horsemen war portend? these arms?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bailiff ran to tell it to the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trusting himself to learn of something news.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span> guests and household both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the quarrellings of yesterday,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose sad and discontented on this morn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s daughter would invite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ladies unto fortune-telling. Vainly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were given playing-cards unto the men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will not seek amusement, neither play.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent they sat in corners, and the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoked pipes, the women knitted; even the flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Appeared asleep.</span>
					<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, throwing down</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fly-scare, wearied by the silence, went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the servants. He was glad to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the kitchen the housekeeper’s cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the cook’s threats and blows, and scullions’ noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until the sound monotonous of spits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turning with various roasts, did gradually</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sweet and pleasant dreaming steep his sense.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Since morning shut up in his room the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was writing, and the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> since the morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the window in the ante-room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was waiting. Having finished now his summons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge called in Protasy, read aloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An accusation couched against the Count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For outrage to his honour, and reviling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against Gervasy for assault and battery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against them both for insolence and costs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He enters in the criminal register!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-164" id="noteref-164" epub:type="noteref">164</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>This must that very day by word of mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delivered be, and openly, ere sunset.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>, with a solemn mien, outstretched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both hands and hearing when he saw the summons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood right gravely, but had fain jumped high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For very joy, for thinking of a lawsuit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt him growing young again, remembering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he went out with summons, to earn blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But likewise liberal pay. The soldier thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose life was spent in war, but old and broken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now rests in hospital, soon as he hears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trump and drum far off, from off his couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Springeth, and in his sleep cries out, “Upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Muscovites!” and on his wooden leg</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fast he rushes from the hospital,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That young men scarcely may him overtake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Protasy hastes to don forensic dress;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet wears he nor the <i xml:lang="pl">zupan</i> nor <i xml:lang="pl">kontusz</i>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They serve alone the law-court’s grand parade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For journeying he has a different dress:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide riding hose, and jacket, whose long skirts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With buttons may be shortened, or let down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below the knee; a cap with ears, and band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fastens round the crown, in sunshine raised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let down in rain. Accoutred thus he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cudgel, and on foot set forward, since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>, like a spy before the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must hide himself before the suit begin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath another form, another name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Well did Protasy, that such haste he made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the road, else had he not for long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enjoyed his summons. For in <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plan of the campaign had all been changed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On sudden to the Judge came Robak, breathless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus saying: “Judge, the aunt will work us woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This lady Telimena’s a coquette</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flirt. When as a helpless child Sophia</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was left, to Telimena’s care did <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confide her, since he heard that she was good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had great knowledge of the world. But I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perceive that she is carrying on intrigues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And possibly enticing Thaddeus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have watched her⁠—or perhaps it is the Count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps the two at once. Let’s think of means</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rid ourselves of her, else may result</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some complications hence, an ill example,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quarrels between the young men, which may mar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy legal compromise!”⁠—“My compromise!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge exclaimed, with unaccustomed heat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’m quit of compromises! I have ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve broken ’em all off!”⁠—“But how is this?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke Robak in; “what reason’s in’t or sense?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No fault of mine,” the Judge said; “and the lawsuit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will make all clear. The Count, that proud young fool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was cause of all the quarrel, and that rascal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy. But all this is for the courts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pity thou wert not in the castle, priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At supper, for thou couldst have then been witness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How grievously the Count offended me.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why did you creep again into those ruins?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Robak; “for you know I cannot bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That castle. Henceforth never shall my foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter within it. What! another quarrel!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chastisement of the Lord! How was it? tell me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this must be forgotten; I am weary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all these fooleries! I’ve weightier business</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to conciliate brawlers, but I fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would bring ye to agree!”⁠—“Thou! make agree!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What means this? Get ye gone with make agree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the devil!” stamping with his foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge exclaimed. Because “Just see this monk! Because</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have received him here with courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wants to lead me by the nose. Learn thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span> are not used to agree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When once they send a summons they must win.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not one time only in their name a suit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has lasted full six generations long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until they gained it. I have done enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fooleries by your counsel, calling in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times the judgment of the Chamberlain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henceforth there is no peace, no, none! none! none!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus exclaiming he rose up, and stamped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With both his feet. “Besides this, for last night’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discourtesy, he must entreat my pardon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Or else we fight.”</span>
					<span>“But, Judge, how would it be</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span> heard of this? why, his despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would slay him. Have not the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span> done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough of evil in that castle yet?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother, I will not unto thee recall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That terrible event. Thou knowest also</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That <span xml:lang="pl">Targowica</span> did make confiscate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some of the castle holdings, and did give them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>. <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>, for his sins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grieving, must under absolution make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vow to render back these lands; and so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did he adopt Sophia, the destitute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inheritrix of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span>; he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid out much money on her bringing up;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would betroth her to his Thaddeus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus unite two families at feud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again in brotherhood, and without shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus yield the plunder to its rightful heiress.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But how is that my business?” said the Judge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I never knew him, never even saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My brother <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>. Scarcely by report</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew his life of rioting, as then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I studied rhetoric in a Jesuit’s school,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then at the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojewode</span>’s as a page I served.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The estates were given me. I took them; he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commanded that I should receive Sophia.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did receive her, gave to her a dowry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for her future also will provide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this old woman’s tale has wearied me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough! And then why has this Count come down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon me with a claim unto the castle?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou, my friend, well knowest, he is kin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span> only distantly.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-165" id="noteref-165" epub:type="noteref">165</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall he insult me thus, and I invite him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To concord?”⁠—“Brother,” said the priest, “for that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shouldst thus do, there are important reasons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rememb’rest thou how <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span> once desired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To send his son unto the wars; but after</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caused him to stay in Litva? Why was this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because at home and in his Fatherland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will be far more needed. Thou hast heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This thing whereof they are speaking everywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which not seldom I have tidings brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now is it time to tell all things, ’tis time!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most weighty things, my brother. War among us!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A war for Poland, brother! we’ll be Poles!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A war for certain! When I hastened here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On secret embassy, our army’s foreposts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already stood upon the Niemen’s shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Napoleon gathers now a mighty host;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Joseph, our <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span>, our white eagles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Polish hosts beside the Frenchmen march.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now are they on the way, and at the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sign from Napoleon they will cross the Niemen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our brothers! Then our country shall awake!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Judge, while listening, laid his glasses down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gazing fixedly upon the priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said nought awhile, but deeply sighed, and tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were circling in his eyes. At last he rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the priest’s neck, and embraced him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My Robak!” cried he, “is this but the truth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many times deceived! Dost thou remember?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They said, ‘Napoleon now is coming, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We looked for him.’ They said, ‘He is in Poland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has the Prussians beaten, he will soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Break through to us.’ And he, what then? He made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Tilsit peace!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-166" id="noteref-166" epub:type="noteref">166</a> Is this the truth? Art thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thyself deceived not?” “Truth!” cried Robak; “true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As God in heaven!”⁠—“O blessed be the lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That tell such news!” the Judge exclaimed, and raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both hands on high. “Thou shalt thine embassy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regret not, Robak, neither shall thy convent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regret it; twenty sheep at choice I give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the convent. Priest, thou yesterday</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst burn to own my chestnut, and didst praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My bay; they shall immediately be harnessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This day, unto thy wagon. Ask of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What thing thou wilt to-day, what pleases thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not thee refuse. But as concerns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This business with the Count, leave me in peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wronged me, and already have I sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A summons. Does this please thee?”</span>
					<span>Then the priest,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Astonished, wrung his hands, and fixed his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the Judge, his shoulders shrugged, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“So when Napoleon bringeth liberty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Litva, when the whole world trembles, thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thinking of a lawsuit? And yet more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, after all that I have said to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt sit here peaceably, with folded hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When needful ’tis to act.”⁠—“To act, and how?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge inquired. “What! hast thou read it not,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Robak, “from my eyes? Hast not thy heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet told it thee? Ah! brother, if thou hast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still something in thee of <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span> blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only consider. If the French in front</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should strike, and if the nation rise behind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What thinkest thou? Then let the Horseman neigh!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-167" id="noteref-167" epub:type="noteref">167</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the Bear roar in Samogitia!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! if some thousand men, if but five hundred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should strike upon the Russians on their rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then like a fire would insurrection spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around. If we might snatch from Muscovy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their cannon, ensigns, then as conquerors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come forth to hail our countrymen, the land’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deliverers! We march; Napoleon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he beholds our lances, will inquire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘What army are ye?’ We reply, ‘Insurgents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O most illustrious Emperor, volunteers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Litva.’ He: ‘Beneath whose captaincy?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘We are led by Judge <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>.’ Ah! who then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will dare of <span xml:lang="pl">Targowica</span> but to whisper.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother, while still the trees of Ponar stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While flows the Niemen, shall <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>’s name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be famed in Litva; and the capital</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Jagellons shall point out thy grandsons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grandsons’ sons, and say, ‘Behold, that man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is a <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>, sprung from those <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Who first made insurrection!’ ”</span>
					<span>But to that</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge: “To me a lesser matter is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The talk of men; ne’er recked I much of praise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God is my witness, of my brother’s sins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am not guilty, never much I mixed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In politics; my office exercising,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ploughing on my bit of land. But I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A noble am; I gladly would efface</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This stain upon my house. I am a Pole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would gladly for my country aught achieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though yield my life up. Never greatly I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sabre did excel, though men from me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have taken blows. The world doth know them in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The latest diets of Poland; I once challenged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wounded two <span xml:lang="pl">Buzwiki</span>, who⁠—But this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is of no moment. What is your opinion?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Needs it that we should take the field at once?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gather marksmen is an easy thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have good store of powder, some few cannon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are at the parish priest’s house. I remember,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once Jankiel said that he had lance-heads stored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I could take at need. He brought them here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In secret, and in packages prepared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Königsberg. We will take them, and at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll make the shafts. Of sabres we’ve no lack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noblemen shall then on horseback mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I and my nephew at their head; and somewhat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Shall be!”</span>
					<span>“O Polish blood!” the Bernardine</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried with deep feeling, and towards the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sprang with open arms, embracing him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“True child of the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>! Heaven designs thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cleanse the sinning of thine exiled brother!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ever honoured thee, but at this moment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love thee, as though we own brothers were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us prepare all things; but ’tis not time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To go forth yet. I will myself appoint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The place, and will to you proclaim the time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know the Czar sent lately couriers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Napoleon, to beg for peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War is not yet declared; but our Prince Joseph<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-168" id="noteref-168" epub:type="noteref">168</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has heard from Binion, a Frenchman, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is of the Emperor’s Council, that all these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Negotiations will but end in nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That war will come to pass. The prince sent me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As scout to give commands that the Litvini</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be ready to inform Napoleon, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shall arrive, that Litva would again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unite herself to Poland, to her sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that they ask that Poland be restored.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meanwhile, brother, it is needful you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should with the Count agree; true ’tis that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eccentric is, and somewhat singular,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But young, and honourable; a good Pole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ve need of such. In revolutions such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eccentric men are necessary. I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can say this from experience; even fools</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be of use, if they are honest, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath good governance. The Count’s a lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he among the nobles has great weight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The district all will move, if that he stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In insurrection. Knowing his great riches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each nobleman will say: ‘ ’Tis a sure thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If lords are in it.’ I’ll make haste at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him.”⁠—“Let him the first declare himself,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge replied; “let him come here to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beg my pardon, for I am his elder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I hold office. As concerns the suit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let it be judged by arbitration.” But</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The Bernardine had slammed the door to.</span>
					<span>“Well!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A happy journey!” said the Judge.</span>
					<span>The priest</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounted a wagon standing at the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He touched the horses with his whip, and shook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The reins upon their sides; the wagon swift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vanished in clouds of mist. The monk’s grey cowl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone rose here and there above the wreaths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Like to a vulture o’er the clouds.</span>
					<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span></span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had long gone forth unto the County’s house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As an experienced fox, when lured by smell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bacon, runs towards it, but as he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knows well the wiles of hunters, as he runs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stands, and sits still, raises up his tail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with it towards his nostrils drives the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As with a fan; interrogates the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If may be hunters have not poisonèd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The meat⁠—Protasy went thus off the road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And circled by a field of hay around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house, pretending that he there perceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vicious ox. Thus making tacks expert,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood beside the garden, and he stooped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ran; thou wouldst have said he followed after</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A landrail, till he all at once sprang o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hedge, and entered in among the hemp.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In this sweet-smelling, green, and thick-grown plant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round a house planted, lies a sure asylum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For beast and man. Not seldom does a hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surprised among the cabbages, spring out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hide among the hemp, than brushwood surer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For deep in the thick green no greyhound can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ertake him, neither mastiff track him out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the strong odour of the hemp. Among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hemp a servant of the mansion can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escape from whip or fist; there may he sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until his lord has stormed away his rage:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even peasants, or escaped recruits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the authorities in forests seek them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do sit among the hemp. And hence in time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of battles, seizures, raids, the parties both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will spare no efforts to possess this stronghold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hemp, which to the house’s front extends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the well, and usually behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Does border on the hops.</span>
					<span>Protasy, though</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bold man, yet felt not a little fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The odour of the hemp recalled to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His past adventures as a <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>, one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After another, taking as his witness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hemp. How one time he with summons served</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A nobleman of Telsz, a Dzindolet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, holding to his breast a pistol, ordered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he should crawl beneath the table, there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recant his summons with a voice of cur.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-169" id="noteref-169" epub:type="noteref">169</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>How later <span xml:lang="pl">Wolodkowicz</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-170" id="noteref-170" epub:type="noteref">170</a> a proud lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And insolent, who Diets would disperse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And violate tribunals; and when he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received official summons, tore the paper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placing <i xml:lang="pl">heyduks</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-171" id="noteref-171" epub:type="noteref">171</a> at the door with sticks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself upraised above the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>’s head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His naked rapier, crying, “Either die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or eat thy paper.” So the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he would eat it, like a prudent man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, stealing to the window, in the garden</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of hemp he entered.</span>
					<span>At that time indeed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas no more Litvin custom to resist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A summons by the sabre or the whip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seldom did the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> hear at times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A scolding. But Protasy could not know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As yet this change of custom, since for long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had served no summons, though aye ready, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would entreat the Judge; the Judge till now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through due respect to ancient years, refused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man’s prayers. To-day this sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would accept from sheer necessity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> gazes, watches; everywhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis silent; slowly pushes he the hemp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aside with both hands, parting wide the thicket</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of stalks, he glided onward through the plants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As dives a fish beneath the waves. He raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head, but everywhere is silence round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He searches through the windows all the palace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Interior; ’tis empty all; he enters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallery. Not fearless, he uplifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The latch; all void as an enchanted castle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He draws his summons forth, and reads aloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His declaration. At this moment he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did hear a rattling, and he wished to fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When some one from the doors towards him came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By good luck, some one known to him. ’Twas Robak!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both marvelled. Plainly it was seen the Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had marched off somewhere with his household all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in great haste, for all the doors stood wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas seen he went off armed; for guns and rifles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were strewn about the floor, and further on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were ramrods, triggers, with the gunsmith’s tools,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith they had the firearms late repaired;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gunpowder and paper for the making</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cartridges. Was then the Count a-hunting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all his servants gone? But what should mean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These hand-arms; here a headless sabre, that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had rusty grown, here lay a beltless sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No doubt a weapon had selected been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out that store; and even been disturbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancient armoury. With heed did Robak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both guns and swords consider; then he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the farm to get intelligence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While looking for the servants, to inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the Count, he in the empty farm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found hardly two old women, and from them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He learned, the master and his household train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had marched tumultuously in arms to Dobrzyn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Throughout Litvania widely had renown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The settlement of the Dobrzynskis, through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its mankind’s courage, and its women’s beauty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In former days ’twas numerous and strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when King John the Third by <i xml:lang="pl">wici</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-172" id="noteref-172" epub:type="noteref">172</a> called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A general levy, from this very Dobrzyn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The standard-bearer of the region led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two hundred nobles to him under arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day the family was fewer and poorer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In former days, in courts of lords, or in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The army, or incursions, <i xml:lang="pl">sejmik</i> broils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had the Dobrzynskis eaten bread of ease:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, like the hireling peasantry, must they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Work for their living; they however wore not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peasants’ russet, but the white capote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With stripes of black, on Sundays the <i xml:lang="pl">kontusz</i>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Likewise the dress their noble ladies wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poorest even, from the jackets worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By peasant women was quite different.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They wore fine calicoes and muslin gowns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when they led the beasts to pasture, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went not in shoes of bark, but slippers wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they reaped corn, and even spun in gloves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And ’mid their Litvin brothers the Dobrzynskis</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were by their tongue distinguished, by their stature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by their features. Of pure Lechite blood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black hair had all, high foreheads, eagle noses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black eyes. They from the Dobrzyn land derive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ancient race, and though four hundred years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Litva settled, they had still preserved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their Mazov speech and customs. When a child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of theirs received a name in christening, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chose for its saint a patron of the Crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas Saint Bartholomew, or Saint Matthias.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus was the son of a Matthias named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bartholomew; his son again was called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matthias; and the women all were named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catherine or Mary. In such great confusion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To know apart each other they conjoined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto their surname other different names,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From some defect or virtue, men and women.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times the men received cognomina,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sign of countrymen’s contempt or scorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A noble sometimes by one name in Dobrzyn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was known, and in the neighbourhood around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By something other. And the nobles round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would copy the Dobrzynskis, and assume,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like them, such surnames, <i xml:lang="pl">imioniska</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-174" id="noteref-174" epub:type="noteref">174</a> styled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now well-nigh every family has such,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’tis not generally known that they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Dobrzyn had their origin, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were necessary, though through all the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Litva, the same custom only rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>From senseless imitation.</span>
					<span>Thus Matthias</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dobrzynski, head of all the family,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was called the Weathercock; then in the year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand, seven hundred, ninety-four,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He changed his surname, and was <i xml:lang="pl">Zabok</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-175" id="noteref-175" epub:type="noteref">175</a> named,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Dobrzynskis christened him the “Rabbit;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the Litvini Matthew of the Matthews.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As he o’er the Dobrzynskis, so his house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruled o’er the hamlet, as it stood between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tavern and the church. Well might be known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas visited but rarely, and a rabble</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did dwell therein, for doorless stood the gate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gardens were unfenced, unsown, the peach-trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the borders were o’ergrown with moss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet this farm the hamlet’s capital</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared, and shapelier than the other houses;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far more extensive, and its right side, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A window stood, was built of brick. Besides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a storehouse, granary, and barn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cattle-shed, and stables; all were placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together in a group, by nobles’ custom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All things seemed wonderful, decayed, and old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house’s roofs were shining, as though formed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some green metal, from the moss and grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That grew thereon, luxuriant as a mead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the barn-thatch, like a hanging garden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of various plants, red crocus, and the nettle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yellow stonecrop, many-coloured trails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mercury, the nests of various birds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the garrets pigeons; in the windows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nests of swallows; at the house’s threshold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White rabbits skip, and in the untrodden grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do burrow. In a word, the house resembled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A cage or rabbit-hutch.</span>
					<span>But it had once</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been fortified. For on each side it bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trace of many and of fierce attacks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still lying in the grass before the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large as a child’s head, was a cannon-ball</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of iron, come down from the Swedish wars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And formerly a door-wing open wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was by this ball as by a stone retained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the courtyard, from between the weeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And absinth, rose the heads of ancient crosses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this unconsecrated ground the sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That here lay some surprised by sudden death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who closely might consider storehouse, barn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cottage, saw their walls all speckled o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From ground to roof, as by an insect swarm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In midst of every spot a bullet lurked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in an earthy hole a humble-bee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Around the doors all latches, hooks, and nails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were cut asunder, or bore sabre marks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here certainly the temper had been proved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of steel of Sigismond, which severs nails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From off the head, or cuts a hook straight through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet in the sword-blade never comes a notch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above Dobrzynski’s door were coats of arms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet were the armorial bearings hidden quite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By ranks of cheeses, thickly archèd o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By nests of swallows. In the house itself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coach-house, and stable, was a weapon-store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in an ancient armoury. Beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roof there hung four monstrous helmets, once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ornament of martial brows; to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The birds of Venus, pigeons, cooed therein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cherished there their nestlings; in the stable</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coat of mail upon the crib outspread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ringèd cuirass, as a manger served,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which the stable-boy did clover throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To young colts. In the kitchen several rapiers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacrilegious cook had blunted, placing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roast upon them, using them as spits.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A horse-tail, trophy from Vienna, served</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As winnower to a hand-mill; in a word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Industrious Ceres thence had banished Mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with Pomona, Flora, and Vertumnus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reigned o’er Dobrzynski’s house and granary.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now the goddesses must yield again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To Mars returning.</span>
					<span>At the dawn of day,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A messenger on horseback had appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Dobrzyn, hastening from house to house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arousing all as for the corvée. All</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brother nobles rise, the streets are filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With crowds; a shout is in the tavern heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lights are seen within the priestly house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old men counsel take, the young men saddle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horses, while the women hold them back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boys all struggle forward; all are eager</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To run, to fight, but know not whom to fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor where, and willy-nilly they must stay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the priest’s dwelling lengthy council lasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tumultuous, and confusèd fearfully.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as the opinions could not be agreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was at last resolved to lay before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father Matthias the whole business straight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Years seventy-two Matthias numberèd;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hale old man, of lordly stature, he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old Confederate of Bar.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-176" id="noteref-176" epub:type="noteref">176</a> Both friends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And enemies remembered yet the strokes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His curved Damascus sabre gave, which cut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asunder pikes and lances like to straw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And which in jest received the modest name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Rod. He from Confederate became</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A royalist, and held with Tyzenhaus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-177" id="noteref-177" epub:type="noteref">177</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lithuanian Treasurer; but when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king acceded to the <span xml:lang="pl">Targowica</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-178" id="noteref-178" epub:type="noteref">178</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matthew once more the royal party left.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So from his frequent change of politics,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He formerly was called the Weathercock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since, like the Weathercock, he changed his standard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With every turn of wind. In vain it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek to know the cause of all these changes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matthew perhaps loved fighting overmuch;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And conquered on one side, would seek again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For war upon another. Or, may be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In politics far-seeing, he had searched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spirit of the times, and wheresoe’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw his country’s good, he thither went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet one thing was certain, the desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of glory, or vile gain, had lured him never.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For never with the Muscovitish party</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He held, and if he only saw a Russian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He foamed, and writhed about; and when the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was conquered, not to meet a Muscovite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He kept within his own house, like a bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Who sucks his paws, deep in the forest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-179" id="noteref-179" epub:type="noteref">179</a></span>
					<span>He</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had long since for the last time gone to war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Wilna with Oginski, where they both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together served beneath Jasinski;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-180" id="noteref-180" epub:type="noteref">180</a> there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He with the Rod had wonders shown of courage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well known it was that he, being all alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had sprung from Praga’s ramparts down, to rescue</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Pan Pociej</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-181" id="noteref-181" epub:type="noteref">181</a> who, upon the battle-field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deserted, wounds had gotten twenty-three.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas long supposed in Litva both were slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But both returned, though riddled through like sieves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon as the war was over, <span xml:lang="pl">Pociej</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to an honest man, would have repaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His benefactor, the Dobrzynski, richly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave him a five-acre farm for life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a yearly pension of a thousand florins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In gold assigned to him. But said Dobrzynski:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let <span xml:lang="pl">Pociej</span> have Matthew, and not Matthew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have <span xml:lang="pl">Pociej</span>, for a benefactor.” Thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The farm refused he, and would take no pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning to his house alone, he lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By labour of his hands, made hives for bees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For cattle medicine; he went to market</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sell the partridges he snared, and game.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Dobrzyn there were sage old men enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who Latin understood, and in the courts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their youth upward had been exercised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were a many richer; but of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The family, the poor, unlearnèd Matthew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was highest honoured, not alone as swordsman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renowned, by wielding of the Rod; but as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man of sure and wise opinion, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The history of the country, and the clan’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Traditions knew completely, and was skilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In law as husbandry; who secrets knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hunting, and of medicine. They even</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ascribed to him (the parish priest said no)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowledge of strange and superhuman things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One thing is certain, that he perfectly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did understand the changes of the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oftener than the farmer’s almanac</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would rightly guess. No wonder, then, that whether</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The question were, when sowing to begin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To send off barges, or to reap the corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or go to law, or an agreement close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nought but by his advice was done in Dobrzyn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man sought such influence not at all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather desiring to be rid of it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He grumbled at his clients, oftenest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thrust them forth in silence from his house;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advice he rarely gave, and not to all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In most important quarrels or disputes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He scarce, when they inquired, his sentence gave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in not many words. ’Twas thought that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would sure take up the question of to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would in person head the enterprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because he greatly loved to fight from youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the Russians was eternal foe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The old man through his lonely garden walked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing the song, “When morning dawn doth rise.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-182" id="noteref-182" epub:type="noteref">182</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right glad he was the weather clearer grew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mist had not arisen yet on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it is wont to do when gather clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still fell down. The wind spread out its hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stroked the mist, and smoothed it, spread it wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the meadow; meanwhile, from above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pale sun with a thousand rays pierced through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The web, and spread it o’er with gold and silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rosy hues;⁠—as when an artist pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Slucko weave rich girdles; on the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A maiden sitting lades the loom with silk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smoothes the warp down with her hand. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A weaver from above throws down to her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver and golden threads, and purple, colours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flowers creating; so the wind to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outspread the earth with wreaths of mist; the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uplifted them. And Matthew sunned himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said his prayers; then to his husbandry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betook himself; he gathered grass and leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sat before his house, and gave a whistle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon this whistle, swift from out the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A flock of rabbits spring, upon the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like flowerets of narcissus. Whitely gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their long ears, and their little eyes beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glitter like blood-red rubies, thickly set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On velvet of the green grass. On their hind-legs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The conies rear; each listens, looks; at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white-downed flock all run to the old man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Allured by cabbage-leaves. Unto his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They spring, upon his knees, his shoulders; he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself like a white rabbit, loves to gather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The conies thus around him, and to stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their warm fur. But he with the other hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throws millet to the sparrows from his cap;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the roof the chattering rabble flock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as the old man thus did please himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Viewing that banquet, all at once the conies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vanished beneath the ground, and to the roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sparrow crowds before new-comers fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who with quick steps now enter in the farm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The envoys these were from the assembly sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of nobles in the priest’s house, and they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Matthew for advice. They from afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saluted him, low bowing; with these words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They welcomed him: “May Jesus Christ be praised!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-183" id="noteref-183" epub:type="noteref">183</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For ever and ever, Amen!” he replied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he heard the weight of their commission,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his cottage he invited them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They entered, sat upon a bench; the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of these ambassadors stood in the midst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now began his sentence to unfold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile a crowd of other nobles came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the Dobrzynskis nearly, of the neighbours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Several from <i xml:lang="pl">zascianki</i> round about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed and unarmed, in chaises and in cars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On foot and horseback. Carriages were stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ponies to the birch-trees tied; around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house they gather, curious of the issue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The room was full already; in the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gather; others in the windows thrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their heads, and list attentive the discourse.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
