<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book IV: Diplomacy and the Chase</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Diplomacy and the Chase</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">An apparition in curl-papers awakes Thaddeus⁠—The mistake discovered too late⁠—The tavern⁠—The emissary⁠—The skilful use of a snuff-box turns the discussion into the right channel The <span xml:lang="pl">Matecznik</span>⁠—The bear⁠—The danger of Thaddeus and the Count⁠—Three shots⁠—The quarrel of the <span xml:lang="pl">Sagalasowka</span> with the <span xml:lang="pl">Sanguszkowna</span>, decided infavour of the single-barrelled <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkowska</span>⁠—The Bigos⁠—The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s story of the duel between <span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span> and <span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span>, interrupted by the hunting of a hare⁠—The end of the story of <span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span> and <span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span>.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O ye contemporaries of our great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Litvanian princes, trees of <span xml:lang="pl">Bialowiez</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Switez, Ponary, and of <span xml:lang="pl">Kuszelew</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose shadow fell upon the crowned heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of threatening <span xml:lang="pl">Witenez</span> and great <span xml:lang="pl">Mindowe</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-105" id="noteref-105" epub:type="noteref">105</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Gedymin, when on the Ponar mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the hunter’s fire, upon a bear-skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lay, and heard the song of sage <span xml:lang="pl">Lizdejko</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lulled by sight of Wilia,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-106" id="noteref-106" epub:type="noteref">106</a> and the murmur</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the <span xml:lang="pl">Wilejka</span>, had the dream concerning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The iron wolf,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-107" id="noteref-107" epub:type="noteref">107</a> and waking, by the god’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expressed commands, the city Wilna built,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which sitteth ’mid the forests, as a wolf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the bisons, wild-boars, bears. And from</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This city Wilna, as the Roman she-wolf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came <span xml:lang="pl">Kiejstut</span>, Olgierd, and the sons of Olgierd,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-108" id="noteref-108" epub:type="noteref">108</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>As great in hunting as renowned in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foe pursuing, or the savage game.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunter’s dream to us the secrets showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of future times, that ever unto Litva</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forests and iron shall be necessary.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forests to hunting in you rode the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last king, who the <i xml:lang="pl">kolpak</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-109" id="noteref-109" epub:type="noteref">109</a> wore of Witold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last of the Jagellons, happy warrior,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-110" id="noteref-110" epub:type="noteref">110</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the last hunter-monarch in Litvania.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My native trees! if Heaven yet permit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I return to gaze on you, old friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I yet find you there? do you still live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You, whom I crept about once as a child?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lives the great Baublis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-111" id="noteref-111" epub:type="noteref">111</a> with the mighty trunk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hollowed by years, wherein, as in a house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some twenty guests might at a table sup?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does Mendog’s thicket flourish yet hard by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parish church?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-112" id="noteref-112" epub:type="noteref">112</a> and thither in the Ukraine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the mansion of the <span xml:lang="pl">Holowinskis</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the banks of Ros, stands yet that elm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So widely spreading, that beneath its shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred youths, a hundred maidens might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Stand up to dance?</span>
					<span>Our monuments! how many</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Russian’s or the merchant’s axe each year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devours! nor leaves unto the woodland singers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A refuge, nor unto the bards, to whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your shade was dear as ’twas unto the birds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Witness that linden-tree in <span xml:lang="pl">Czarnolas</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Responsive to the voice of John,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-113" id="noteref-113" epub:type="noteref">113</a> that formed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inspiration of so many rhymes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Witness that oak that sings so many wonders</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Unto the Cossack bard.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-114" id="noteref-114" epub:type="noteref">114</a></span>
					<span>O native trees,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How much I owe to you! Indifferent sportsman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escaping from my comrades’ mockery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For missing game, I in your silence chased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imaginings; forgetting all the hunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sat within your close. The greybeard moss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread silvery round me, mingled with deep blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And black of rotten berries; and with red</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heathery hills were glowing, decked with berries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though with beads of coral. All around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was darkness; overhead the branches hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like green, thick-gathering, low-lying clouds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The storm somewhere above their moveless arch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was raging, with a groaning, murmuring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howling, and rattling loud, and thunder-peal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wondrous deafening roar. To me it seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hanging sea was raging overhead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below, like ruined cities, here stood up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The o’erthrow of an oak from out the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In likeness of a mighty hulk; thereon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaning, like fragments of old walls and columns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, branchy trunks, and there half-rotten boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enclosed by pale of grasses. In the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this intrenchment fearful ’tis to look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there the rulers of the forest sit⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boars, bears, and wolves; and at its entrance lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bones half-gnawn of some imprudent guests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times upspurt, ’through verdure of the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ’twere two waterspouts, two horns of stags,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flits between the trees some animal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With yellow girdle, like a sunbeam, that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On entering is lost among the wood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And once more all is silent down below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woodpecker taps lightly on the pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flies off further; he is gone, is hidden.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still his beak goes tapping ceaselessly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As children hiding to each other call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek them out. More near a squirrel sits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding between her paws a nut, and gnaws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hanging her bushy tail above her eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As falls a helmet-plume upon a cuirass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although thus veiled, she gazes heedful round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A guest is seen⁠—the woodland dancer springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From tree to tree, like lightning flitting by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last she enters an invisible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opening within a tree-trunk, like a Dryad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning to her native tree. Again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>’Tis silent.</span>
					<span>Presently, a branch disturbed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is quivering among the sundered crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of service-trees; and rosier than their berries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are shining cheeks; it is a gatherer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of nuts or berries⁠—’tis a maiden. She</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In basket of rough bark doth proffer berries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh-gathered, fresh as her own rosy lips.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside her is a youth; he bendeth down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hazel-branches, and the damsel catches</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The nuts that twinkling fly.</span>
					<span>Then, hear they sound</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of horns and dogs’ loud baying, and they guess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunt is coming near to them; and fearing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They vanish from the eye, like forest gods.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span> was great stir. But not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baying of dogs, or neigh of steeds, or creaking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of carts, nor sound of horns the signal giving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could draw forth Thaddeus from his couch. All dressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had fall’n upon the bed, and slept as sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As marmot in its hole. No one among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young men thought to seek him through the house;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each one, taken up but with himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made haste wherever ordered; they completely</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Forgot their sleeping comrade.</span>
					<span>He lay snoring.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunbeams through an opening in the shutter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut out in heart-shape, fell into the darkness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fiery pillar on the sleeper’s brow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He still desired to sleep, and turned him round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To avoid the sunshine. All at once he heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A knocking, half awoke; a joyful waking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was. He felt himself as full of life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a young bird; he lightly drew his breath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy he felt, and to himself he laughed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking of all that happened yesterday.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He coloured, and he sighed, and his heart beat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He at the window looked; oh! wonderful!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a transparency of sunbeams, in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That heart, shone two bright eyes, wide-opened as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eyes of those who pierce from daylight clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a shadow. And a little hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw, that, like a fan, beside the face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was spread towards the sun, to shield the eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slender fingers to the rosy light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned, through and through were reddened ruby like.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lips curious, questioning, he saw, a little</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart, and tiny teeth that gleamed like pearls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the coral, and a face which, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protected from the sun by rosy hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Itself blushed like a rose.</span>
					<span>Beneath the window</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay Thaddeus, hidden in the shadow; lying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his back, he marvelled at the wondrous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vision, and saw it right above himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Almost upon his face. He knew not whether</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It were a living thing, or if he dreamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one of those sweet, bright, and childlike faces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we remember to have seen in dreams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of innocent years. The little face bent down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gazed, with terror trembling, and with joy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! he saw too plainly; he remembered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He recognised those short locks, brightly golden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tiny, twisted papers, white as snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like silvery husks, that in the sunlight shone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like aureole on the picture of a saint.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He started up; at once the vision fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the noise terrified; he waited, yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It came not back; he only heard again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A knocking thrice repeated, and these words:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Get up, sir; it is time for hunting. You</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have slept too long.” He sprang up from his couch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with both hands he pushed the shutter back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until the hinges shook, and flying wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It struck both walls. He sprang out, and looked round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thoughtful, confounded; nothing did he see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor trace perceived of aught. Not far beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The window stretched the paling of the orchard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon it leaves of hop and flowery garlands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waved to and fro; had some light hands disturbed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had the wind stirred them? Thaddeus long gazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon them, but he ventured not to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the garden; only leaned against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The garden wall. He lifted up his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his finger on his lips commanded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silence unto himself, that he might not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By ev’n a hasty word the silence break.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sought he in his forehead, knocked at it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if for memories long laid to sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last his fingers gnawing ev’n to blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis well, ’tis well, thus!” shouted he aloud.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And in the mansion where a while ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was so much shouting, now ’twas void and still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in the grave; all to the field had gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thaddeus pricked up his ears, and placed both hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As trumpets to them, listening till the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore towards him, blowing from the forest land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clamour of the horses, shouts of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The hunting crowd.</span>
					<span>The horse of Thaddeus</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already saddled waited in the stall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seized a rifle, mounted, and he galloped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On headlong like a madman to the taverns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which stood beside the chapel where the beaters</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Should gather in the morning.</span>
					<span>The two taverns</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaned towards each other on each side the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each with their windows threatening one another</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like enemies. The old one ’longed by right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the Castle’s lord; <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span> built</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other to the Castle’s prejudice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the first, as in his heritage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy would preside, and in the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protasy took the highest place at table.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The newer tavern nought remarkable</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had in its aspect; but the older one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was builded after a most ancient model,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invented by the artificers of Tyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which afterwards the Jews spread through the world;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A kind of architecture, quite unknown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To foreign builders; we received it from</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The Jews.</span>
					<span>The tavern in the front was like</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ark, behind a sanctuary resembling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ark, the true square-cornered chest of Noah,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day known by the simple name of barn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therein are various kinds of animals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horses, and cows, and oxen, bearded goats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But overhead the company of birds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though of reptiles but a pair, there are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insects besides.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-115" id="noteref-115" epub:type="noteref">115</a> The hinder part, erected</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In form of wondrous sanctuary, recalls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That famous edifice of Solomon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, highest in the trade of building skilled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The artificers of Hiram raised on Zion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Jews still imitate it in their schools;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the designing of the schools is seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In barns and taverns. Formed of planks and straw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roof, sharp-pointed and high raised, was bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tattered as the <i xml:lang="pl">kolpak</i> of a Jew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corners of a gallery protrude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the top, supported by a row</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wooden pillars. What a wonder seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To architects, these columns still endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although half-rotten, and all crooked set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in the tower of Pisa; not according</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Grecian models, for they are devoid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pedestals or capitals. Above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The columns arches run half-circular,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Likewise of wood; and, copying Gothic art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above there are artistic ornaments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not carved by chisel or by graving-tool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But cut out by the axe of carpenter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crooked like arms of Sabbath candlesticks.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-116" id="noteref-116" epub:type="noteref">116</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the end hang balls⁠—resembling somewhat buttons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which on their heads the Jews in praying hang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And which they <i xml:lang="pl">cyces</i> call in their own tongue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one word, seems the crooked, tottering tavern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From far off, like a Jew, who to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In praying nods; the roof is like a cap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thatch disordered like a beard, the smoky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dirty walls resemble a black veil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the front protrudes the carving, like</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The <i xml:lang="pl">cyces</i> on his forehead.</span>
					<span>In the middle</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the tavern a division is, as in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Jewish schools; one part entirely full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of long and narrow chambers, serves to lodge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ladies and travelling gentlemen; the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contains a great hall; and along each side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A narrow wooden table, many-legged;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the table there are stools, which, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lower than the table, yet are like to it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As children to the father.</span>
					<span>On the stools</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around sat peasant men and peasant women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And likewise petty nobles, in a row.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bailiff at a separate table sat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For after early mass at chapel, since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas Sunday, all had come to amuse themselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drink at <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span>’s house. Before each one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already hummed a goblet of grey <i xml:lang="pl">wódka</i>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The serving-maiden with the bottle ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To every one. In middle of the room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span>, the proprietor, who wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lengthy <i xml:lang="pl">sarafan</i> which reached the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fastened with silver clasps; upon his girdle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of silk one hand was planted, with the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He solemnly stroked down his hoary beard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glancing around him he gave forth commands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcomed the guests who entered, stood beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those sitting down. He opened conversation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made those quarrelling agree, but yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself served no one, only walked around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ancient Jew, and everywhere well known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For honesty, he many years had held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On lease the tavern; of the peasants none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or nobles ever had complaining brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him to the mansion. Why complain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had good drinks at choice; strict reckoning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He kept, but void of cheating; cheerfulness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbade not, but allowed not drunkenness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was of pastimes a great lover, weddings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And christenings were celebrated at</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His house; and every Sunday he had music</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There from the village, wherein a bass-viol</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And bagpipes used to be.</span>
					<span>He understood</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What music was; himself had great renown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For talent; with the cymbals, of his nation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The instrument, he formerly was used</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To go to mansions, and astonishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rouse by his playing and by singing. He</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could sing with science and with learning. Though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a Jew, he had a Polish accent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of tolerable purity, and most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loved national songs. He brought a number back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From every expedition beyond Niemen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From <span xml:lang="pl">Halicz</span> <i xml:lang="pl">kolomyjki</i>, and mazurkas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Warsaw.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref-117" epub:type="noteref">117</a> Fame reported through the district</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(I cannot tell if truly) that he first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought from beyond the boundary, and spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That song throughout his district, now renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the world; but which for the first time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trumpets of the Polish legions played</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Italians.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-118" id="noteref-118" epub:type="noteref">118</a> Well the power of singing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Litva pays; it gains the people’s love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brings both fame and riches. <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had made a fortune; satiate with gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glory, he had hung up on the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nine-stringed cymbals; with a family.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He settled down, and occupied himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With selling liquor in the tavern. He</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was also under-rabbin in the town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But everywhere agreeable both as guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And governor of his house. He understood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right well the trade of corn, by means of barges;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such knowledge is most needful in the country.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He also had the fame of a good Pole.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-119" id="noteref-119" epub:type="noteref">119</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas he who first the quarrels reconciled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So often bloody, that had raged between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The taverns, hiring both upon a lease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And equally respected him the old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Supporters of <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>, and the servants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Judge <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>. Only he could hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In check the threatening <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> of <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quarrelling <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>; they repressed before</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span> their ancient causes of offence;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy dreadful with the hand, Protasy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With tongue.</span>
					<span>Gervasy was not there, for he</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had gone unto the hunt, as wishing not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young and inexperienced Count should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone on such a parlous expedition,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one so weighty; so he went with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be his counsellor and to protect.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To-day, Gervasy’s place, that from the threshold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was most removed, between two benches placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the very corner of the tavern, called</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="pl">Pokucie</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-120" id="noteref-120" epub:type="noteref">120</a> by Friar Robak occupied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared. ’Twas <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span> had placed him there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas seen he for the friar had great respect;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For soon as he perceived his goblet low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He quickly ran, and ordered to fill up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glass with July mead<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-121" id="noteref-121" epub:type="noteref">121</a> unto the brim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas said that he had known the Bernardine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From youth, somewhere in foreign countries. Robak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came often to the tavern in the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And held there conference on weighty things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In secret with the Jew; the priest, ’twas said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A smuggler was, but ’twas a calumny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Unworthy of belief.</span>
					<span>Now Robak, on</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The table leaning, half-aloud discoursed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A crowd of nobles him surrounded, lending</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ears, and bending down their noses to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The priestly snuff-box; from it they took pinches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the nobles snorted like to mortars.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Reverendissime</i>,” Skoluba said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This is tobacco, this goes up into</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crown of the head. Since first I wore a nose”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Here stroked he his long nose)⁠—“I never had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pinch of such tobacco.” Here he sneezed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A second time. “ ’Tis truly Bernardine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No doubt it comes from Kowno, famous town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the world for mead and for tobacco.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I went there”⁠—Robak interrupted him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The health of all you gentles, gracious sirs!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As touches the tobacco, hum! it comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From further parts than good Skoluba thinks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It comes from <span xml:lang="pl">Jasna Gora</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-122" id="noteref-122" epub:type="noteref">122</a> and the Paulines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make snuff like this in <span xml:lang="pl">Czenstochowa</span>’s town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where is that picture for such wonders famed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Virgin, Mother of our Lord, and Queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Poland, and Princess of Lithuania.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>True, still she watches o’er her royal crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now the schism<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-123" id="noteref-123" epub:type="noteref">123</a> in Litva’s duchy reigns.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“From <span xml:lang="pl">Czenstochowa</span>?” <span xml:lang="pl">Wilbik</span> said; “I went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to confession thirty years ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I was there for pardon. Is it true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the town the Frenchman resteth now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that he wishes to throw down the church,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seize the treasure, for all this is in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lithuanian Courier?”⁠—“ ’Tis not true,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replied the Bernardine; “illustrious sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Napoleon is a Catholic, and most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exemplary; the Pope anointed him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They live in harmony together, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Convert men in the Frankish nation, which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had grown somewhat corrupt. ’Tis true much silver</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was given from <span xml:lang="pl">Czenstochowa</span> to the treasury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the nation, for the Fatherland, for Poland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so the Lord himself commands, his altars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are aye the treasury of the Fatherland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have a hundred thousand Polish troops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Warsaw’s duchy, and perhaps shall soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have more, and who should for the army pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If not yourselves, Litvini? you but give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your money to the coffers of the Russians.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The devil may give!” cried <span xml:lang="pl">Wilbik</span>, “they take from us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By force!”⁠—“Alas! good sir,” a peasant said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Humbly, while bowing to the priest, and scratching</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head; “that’s for the nobles; they but bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half of the burden; we are stripped like bark.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou churl!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-124" id="noteref-124" epub:type="noteref">124</a> Skoluba cried; “thou fool! thou hast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The best of it; you peasants are used thereto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As eels to skinning; but to us <em>well-born</em>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To us <em>Most Powerful</em>, used to golden freedom⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, brothers! ‘once a noble on his land’ ”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yes, yes,” cried all; “ ‘might with a <span xml:lang="pl">Wojewode</span> stand.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-125" id="noteref-125" epub:type="noteref">125</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day they our nobility dispute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Command us to search papers through and prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our noble birth by paper.”⁠—“That’s a less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affair for you,” <span xml:lang="pl">Juraha</span> cried, “for you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From peasant ancestors have been ennobled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I am sprung of princes! Ask of <em>me</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A patent! When I first became a noble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lord alone remembers. Let the Russian</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the forest go to ask the oaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who gave to them a patent to grow high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above all plants.”⁠—“Prince,” answered <span xml:lang="pl">Zagiel</span>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tell tales to whom you list; here will you find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No doubt a mitre, and in not one house.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A cross is in your ’scutcheon,” cried <span xml:lang="pl">Podhajski</span>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A hidden allusion to a neophyte</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once in your family.”⁠—“ ’Tis false!” cried Birbasz;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I come of Tartar Counts, and bear the cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above my crest of Arks.”⁠—“The <span xml:lang="pl">Poraj</span>,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-126" id="noteref-126" epub:type="noteref">126</a> cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Mickiewicz</span>; “with a mitre on field or,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A princely ’scutcheon is. <span xml:lang="pl">Stryjkowski</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-127" id="noteref-127" epub:type="noteref">127</a> wrote</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Concerning this a great deal.”</span>
					<span>Thereupon</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose loud murmurs in the tavern. Then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bernardine resorted to his snuff-box;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turn all speakers he regaled. At once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murmurs ceased, and each one took a pinch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From courtesy, and several times they sneezed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bernardine continued, profiting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By this divergence: “Ah! great men have sneezed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this tobacco! Would you, gentlemen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believe that from this snuff-box General</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span> took a pinch three times?”⁠—“<span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span>?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cried.⁠—“Yes, yes, the General himself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was in camp when from the Germans he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recovered Dantzig.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-128" id="noteref-128" epub:type="noteref">128</a> He something had to write,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, fearing he might sleep, he took a pinch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took one, sneezed, twice clapped me on the shoulder.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Priest Robak,” said he, “Friar Bernardine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll meet again in Litva, may be ere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A year has passed; tell the Litvini they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With <span xml:lang="pl">Czenstochowa</span> snuff must me await,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I will take no other kind but this.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The friar’s discourse such great astonishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aroused, such joy, that all that company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So noisy now kept silence for a while.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then they repeated, in half-silent words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tobacco brought from Poland? <span xml:lang="pl">Czenstochowa</span>?</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span>? from Italian land?”⁠—until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last together, as though thought with thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And word with word together ran, they all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one accordant voice, as at a signal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouted: “<span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span>!” All together shouted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pressed close; the peasant with the Tartar Count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Mitre with the Cross, the <span xml:lang="pl">Poraj</span> with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Griffin and the Ark, forgetting all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even the Bernardine, they only sang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Exclaiming, “<i xml:lang="pl">Wódka</i>, mead, and wine!”</span>
					<span>Long time</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friar Robak hearkened to the melody.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length he wished to break it off; he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His snuff-box in both hands, and with his sneezing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confused the melody, and ere they might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tune up again, thus made he haste to speak:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You praise my snuff, good sirs; now pray observe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’s doing in the inside of the box.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, wiping with a cloth the inside soiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He showed a tiny army painted there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like swarm of flies; a horseman in the midst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large as a beetle, certainly their leader.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spurred the horse, as though he fain would leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the heavens; one hand upon the reins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other at his nose. “Look here,” said Robak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Look at this threatening form; guess ye who ’tis?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All looked with curiosity. “He is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A great man, and an Emperor, but not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That of the Muscovites; their Czars have never</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taken tobacco.”⁠—“That a great man!” <span xml:lang="pl">Czydzik</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclaimed; “and in a capote! I had thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That great men went in gold. Because among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Muscovites each petty general,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good sir, shines all in gold, just like a pike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In saffron!”⁠—“Pooh!” said Rymsza; “I once saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I was young, our nation’s chief, <span xml:lang="pl">Kosciuszko</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he wore a Cracovian <i xml:lang="pl">sukmana</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s a <i xml:lang="pl">czamara</i>.”⁠—“What sort of <i xml:lang="pl">czamara</i>?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-129" id="noteref-129" epub:type="noteref">129</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Objected <span xml:lang="pl">Wilbik</span>; “that’s a <i xml:lang="pl">taratatka</i>.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But that has fringes, this thing is quite plain,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried <span xml:lang="pl">Mickiewicz</span>. Thereon arose disputes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concerning <i xml:lang="pl">taratatki</i> and <i xml:lang="pl">czamary</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-130" id="noteref-130" epub:type="noteref">130</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The prudent Robak, seeing the discourse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was scattering thus, began once more to gather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All to the central fire, unto his snuff-box.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regaled them, they all sneezed, and wished good health</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one another; he proceeded further</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the theme. “When the Emperor Napoleon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes in a battle snuff, time after time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a sure sign he will win the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Austerlitz for instance;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-131" id="noteref-131" epub:type="noteref">131</a> thus the French</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood with their guns, and on them charged a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Muscovites. The Emperor looked thereon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And silence kept. Each time the Frenchmen fired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Russian regiments strewed the earth like grass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For regiment after regiment galloped up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fell down from their saddles. Often as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A regiment lay low, the Emperor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took snuff. Till at the last did Alexander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother Constantine, the German Emperor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Francis, take to their heels. The Emperor then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing the fight was over, looked on them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laughed, and shook his finger. Now if any,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of you, sirs, who are present, ever should</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be in the Emperor’s army, recollect this.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah!” cried Skoluba, “when shall all this be?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As often now as in the almanac</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A saint’s day stands, on every holy-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They still do prophesy the Frenchmen to us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man may look, may look, till wink his eyes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as the Russian held us still he holds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the sun rises eyes are wet with dew.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sir,” said the Bernardine, “like an old woman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis to lament, and it is like a Jew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wait with folded hands, till some one ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the tavern knocking at the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twill be no hard work for Napoleon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To beat the Muscovites; already he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has three times thrashed the Swabians’ skin, has driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The English back beyond the sea;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-132" id="noteref-132" epub:type="noteref">132</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-133" id="noteref-133" epub:type="noteref">133</a> he surely</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will finish off the Muscovites; but what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will follow thence? are you aware, good sir?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, the Litvanian nobles will to horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And draw their sabres, at that very time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When none are left to fight with; and Napoleon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having defeated all his foes alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will say, ‘I’ll do without you, who are you?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus it is not enough to expect a guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor to invite him either; one must gather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The household, and the tables must be laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ere the festival the house must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleansed of its sweepings. I repeat it, children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Sweep, sweep the house clean.”</span>
					<span>Thereon followed silence;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then voices in the crowd, “How cleanse our house?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We will do all things; we for all are ready.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let the good priest deign to explain himself.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The priest gazed from the window, breaking off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The conversation; something he perceived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That his attention did engage. From forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The window looked he; then he rising said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To-day I have not time; we’ll talk of this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More fully later on. To-morrow I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be on business in the district town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I shall come to you upon my way.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And for night quarters come to <span xml:lang="pl">Niehrymow</span>,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bailiff said; “right glad the Standard-bearer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-134" id="noteref-134" epub:type="noteref">134</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be; indeed, the Litwin proverb says,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Happy as is a friar in <span xml:lang="pl">Niehrymow</span>.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To us,” <span xml:lang="pl">Zubkowski</span> said, “come, if it please you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there are linen sheets, a tub of butter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cow, or sheep; remember, priest, these words;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘A happy man, he chanced on luck, as came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friar to <span xml:lang="pl">Zubkow</span>.’ ”⁠—“And to us,” exclaimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skoluba; “unto us, <span xml:lang="pl">Terajewicz</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Bernardine departed ever hungry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From <span xml:lang="pl">Pucewicz</span>.” Thus all the noblemen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With prayers and promises led forth the priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he already was beyond the door.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He had beforehand through the window seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thaddeus, who flew along the roadway, in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast gallop, with no hat, with head bent down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pale and gloomy visage; ceaselessly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spurred the horse, and flogged it. Much this sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Troubled the Bernardine; so hastened he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the young man forth with rapid steps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the great forest, which, as far as eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could follow, blackened all the horizon’s verge.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Who the abysmal regions has explored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Litvanian forests, to the very</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Centre, the inner kernel of the woodlands?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fisher coasting round the shore, scarce visits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep seas; so the sportsman hovers round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bed of the Litvanian forests; yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows them scarcely on the outer side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their form, their countenance; but unto him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inner secrets of their heart are strange.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rumour alone or fable knows what passes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therein; for shouldst thou ev’n the pine-woods pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And outer forests, thou wouldst come upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rampart in the abyss, of trunks, stumps, roots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By quaking turf defended, thousand streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And net of high-grown plants, and lofty ant-hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With nests of wasps, of hornets, coils of snakes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even if, by courage passing man’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shouldst surmount these barriers, it were but</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To encounter graver perils further on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At each step lie in wait, like pits for wolves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lakelets, whose borders are with grass o’ergrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More deep than human searching may discern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great is the likelihood that fiends sit there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water of these ponds is sticky, spotted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blood-like rust, and from within a smoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arises ever, vomiting foul smells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereby the trees are stripped of leaves and bark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bald, dwarfish, worm-devoured, diseased, their boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drooping with tetter of a loathsome moss,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-135" id="noteref-135" epub:type="noteref">135</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And humpy trunks, with ugly toadstools bearded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sit around the water, like a troop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of witches, warming them around the cauldron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Wherein they seethe a corpse.</span>
					<span>Behind these lakes,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not merely by a step, but by the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain to be reached, for everything is now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Veiled in a cloud of mist that evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arises from the quaking marshy lands;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But latterly beyond this mist, as fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does commonly report, a region lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most fair and fertile, the chief kingdom this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of beasts and capital of plants. Therein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seeds of every tree and herb are stored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whence their races spread o’er all the earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therein, as in the ark of Noah, all kinds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of animals preserve one pair at least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For propagation. In the very centre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis said, the ancient urus, bison, bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do hold their courts as emperors of the waste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around them, on the trees, the agile lynx,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ravenous glutton⁠—watchful ministers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do rest them. Further yet, like feudal vassals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wild-boars dwell, the wolves, and large-horned elks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above their heads are falcons and wild eagles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Living like courtly parasites at tables</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lords. These patriarchal pairs of beasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hidden in the forest’s heart, and to the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invisible, send forth as colonists</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their children to the forest’s verge; themselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile dwell quiet in the capital.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They never die by sharp-edged arms, or gun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But being old they fall by natural cause.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have their cemet’ry, where, nearing death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The birds lay down their plumes, the quadrupeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hairs; the bear, when, all his teeth decayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He can no longer chew his food; the stag</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decrepit, when he scarce may stir his limbs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The venerable hare, when that the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is stagnant in his veins; the hoary raven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The falcon, when grown blind; the eagle, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His ancient beak so crooks into an arch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-136" id="noteref-136" epub:type="noteref">136</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, closed for aye, it nourishes his throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more; they pass unto their cemetery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even the lesser beasts, when hurt or sick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten to die here in their native place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence in those places which mankind may reach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead bones of animals are never found.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-137" id="noteref-137" epub:type="noteref">137</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis said that thither in the capital,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the beasts good customs are preserved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because they rule themselves, yet uncorrupt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By civilising influence of man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They know no laws of property, which vex</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our world, nor duels know, or warlike arts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as the fathers dwelt in Paradise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So live to-day their children, wild and tame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In love and concord. Never bites or gores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one the other. Should a man e’en enter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He might, although unarmed, in safety pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the beasts; they would upon him gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that same wonder, as upon the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sixth day of creation their first fathers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dwelt within the garden, looked on Adam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before they quarrelled with him. Happily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man shall ever stray unto this place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Difficulty, Care, and Death prevent him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sometimes alone have mastiffs, hot in chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entered unguardedly ’mid marshes, moss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ravines, and, wounded by their inner horror,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fled back, loud whining, with distracted looks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by their master’s hand though long caressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet mad with fear still tremble at his feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These central wastes, to mankind all unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunters in their tongue call <i xml:lang="pl">Mateczniki</i>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou foolish bear! if thou hadst stayed at home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the <span xml:lang="pl">Matecznik</span>, never would the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have heard of thee; but whether the sweet smell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of beehives lured thee, or thou wert possessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a desire unto the ripened barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou camest forth unto the forest’s verge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thinner grows the wood, and there at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forester did thine existence track;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he sent forth the beaters, cunning spies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mark where thou didst posture, and where thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst make thy night-lair. Now the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> comes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the hunt, and stationing the ranks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has shut out thy retreat to the <span xml:lang="pl">Matecznik</span>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thaddeus now learned that but a short time since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the deep abysses of the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mastiffs entered. All was still. In vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunters stretched their ears. In vain they listened</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To silence, as to most engaging speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waited long, unmoving, in the place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the music of the forest played</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To them from far; the dogs plunge in the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As sea-mews underneath the waves; the hunters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turning their double-barrels to the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> gaze. He, kneeling down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth doth question with his ear; and as,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the countenance of a physician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glance of friends peruses the decree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of life or death of one unto them dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunters, in the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s skill and art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confiding, fixed upon him looks of hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fear. “It is, it is,” he whispering said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sprang upon his feet. He heard; they still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must listen. At last they hear; one dog whined loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then two, then twenty; all the dogs together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In scattered crowd perceived the scent, and whined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell on the track, bayed loud, and still barked on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not now the bark deliberate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dogs pursuing hare, or fox, or hind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a continual cry, short, frequent, broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eager. Now had the dogs upon a track</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not distant fallen; they pursue by sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When now the cry of chase on sudden ceased;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had reached the beast. Again a shriek, a whine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beast defends himself, and certainly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inflicts some hurt; among the bay of dogs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More and more frequent comes a dying groan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunters stood, and each with loaded gun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent himself forward like a bow, with head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrust in the forest. Longer can they not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stay there; one after other from the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Escapes, and in the forest thrusts himself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each would be first to meet the beast, although</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> gave them warning;⁠—though the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>On horseback passed the standpoints round, exclaiming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That be he peasant churl, or nobleman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever from the spot should stir, should feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His leash upon his back. There was no help;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each rushed, despite command, into the wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three guns went off at once! Then straightway sounded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cannonade, till louder than the shots.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bear did roar, and echo filled the woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A horrid roar of rage, despair, and pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after it the shriek of dogs, the shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hunters, and the prickers’ horns resound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From midmost of the forest. In the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some of the hunters hasten, others cock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their triggers, all rejoiced; alone the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclaims in sorrow they have missed. The hunters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prickers one side went athwart the beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the forest and the toils. But now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bear, alarmed by all that throng of dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And men, turned backwards to that place, that with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Least diligence was guarded, towards the plains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence all the hunters stationed had removed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where, of all the numerous hunters’ ranks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, Thaddeus, and the Count alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Remained, with a few toilers.</span>
					<span>Here the forest</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was thinner. In its depths was heard a roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shaking of the ground, till from the thicket,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though from out the clouds, the bear rushed forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like thunderbolt; the dogs pursued him, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were frightened, rushed about; he reared aloft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his hind legs, and around him gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frightening his enemies by dreadful roars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his forepaws tearing now beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stones overgrown with moss, now blackened branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurling them over dogs and men, until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He broke away a tree, and whirling this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round like a club, to leftward and to right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rushed on those who guarded last the toils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count and Thaddeus. They stood fearlessly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ready to step forward, towards the beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pointing the barrels of their guns, like two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightning conductors in a dark cloud’s bosom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till both, in the same instant, drew their triggers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! inexperienced!⁠—their guns both sounded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together; they had missed! The bear sprang forward.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They seized a hunting spear implanted there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all their four arms, and for its possession</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struggled together. Looking, they beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From forth that great red muzzle gleam two rows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of tusks, and now a great paw armed with claws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descends upon their heads. They both grew pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And backwards sprang, escaping unto where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wood grew rarer. After them the bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reared up behind; now had he hooked his claws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Missed them, ran nearer, and again upreared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his black paw stretched unto the yellow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hair of the Count;⁠—he would have torn his skull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Off from his brains, as from his head the hat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the Assessor and the Regent sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From either side; but by some hundred paces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy ran before them, and with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Robak, though without a gun; but all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The three together fired as at command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bear sprang up, like hare before a hound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fell, his head on earth, and turning o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All four paws like a mill, a bloody load</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of flesh, that rolled o’er just where stood the Count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hurled him from his feet upon the earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bear still roared; he tried once more to rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When on him fastened the enraged <span xml:lang="pl">Strapczyna</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And furious <span xml:lang="pl">Sprawnik</span>.</span>
					<span>Then the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> seized</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His buffalo horn that hung down from a string,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long, mottled, twisted like the serpent boa,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pressed it with both hands unto his lips.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His cheeks swelled out like gourds, and shone his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blood;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-138" id="noteref-138" epub:type="noteref">138</a> he shut them half, and half his chest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew back into its depths, and forth therefrom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent half his store of spirit to his lungs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And played. The horn, like to a stormy wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whirling breath, bore music to the waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And twofold made itself with echo. Silent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunters and the prickers stood in wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At that strong, pure, and wondrous harmony.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man now once more to hunters’ ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Displayed that art, whereby he once had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renowned in forests. Presently he filled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made alive, the forests and the oaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though he had a kennel loosed therein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had begun to hunt. For in his playing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was of hunting an epitome.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first a clamouring noise⁠—the réveille;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then groans succeeded groans, with whining cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And baying of dogs, and here and there a tone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harsher like thunder⁠—the discharge of guns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here broke he off, but held the horn; to all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed as though the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> still played on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>But echo ’twas that played.</span>
					<span>He blew again.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wouldst have thought the horn had changed its shape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now waxed greater in the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now thinner grew, while counterfeiting cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of various beasts. Now in a wolfish neck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outstretching in a long and plaintive howl;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again, as seething in a bearish throat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It roared; then bellowing of bisons tore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The winds in twain.</span>
					<span>Here broke he off, but still</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He held the horn; it seemed to all as though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> still played on, but echo played.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having this masterpiece of horn-playing art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once heard, the oaks repeated it unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The oaks, the beeches to the beeches.</span>
					<span>Now</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He blew again. As though a hundred horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were in that horn, were heard the mingled cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pricking on, and fear, and anger; noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hunters, kennels, and of beasts, till high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> raised the horn, and with a hymn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of triumph smote the clouds.</span>
					<span>He broke off now,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But held the horn; to all it did appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> still played on, but echo</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was that played. As many as the trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many horns were in the pine-wood; they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore on the song to others, as from chorus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To chorus; on the music went, aye wider,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aye further, softer aye, and ever purer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aye more perfect, till it disappeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere, upon the threshold of the heavens.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-139" id="noteref-139" epub:type="noteref">139</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, taking both hands from the horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide spread them; down the horn fell, on the belt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of leather rocking. With a face o’erblown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And radiant, with uplifted eyes, the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood as inspired, pursuing by the ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last tones vanishing; but meanwhile sounded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand plaudits, thousand gratulations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And shouts of “<i xml:lang="pl">Vivat!</i>”</span>
					<span>Silence gradually</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Succeeded, and the chatterers’ eyes all turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the great, fresh bear-corpse. He lay there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blood all sprinkled, riddled through with balls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His breast entangled in the thick grass fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wide his forepaws like a cross seemed spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He breathed as yet; his nostrils poured a stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of blood; his eyes still opened, but his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved not; the Chamberlain’s two bulldogs held him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast by each ear. Upon the left <span xml:lang="pl">Strapczyna</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Sprawnik on the right hung, strangling him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And sucking the black blood.</span>
					<span>Thereon the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave orders to insert an iron rod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the dogs’ teeth, and to open wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their jaws; then with the gun-stocks were o’erturned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The animal’s remains upon their back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more a threefold <i xml:lang="pl">vivat</i> smote the clouds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How?” cried the Assessor, turning round his gun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“How then? my carabine? We have the best o’t.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How then? my carabine? ’Tis no great bird;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-140" id="noteref-140" epub:type="noteref">140</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what has it performed? This is not new</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To it, it lets no charge loose on the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had it as a gift from Prince <span xml:lang="pl">Sanguszko</span>.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He showed a gun of marvellous workmanship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though small, and he began to reckon up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its virtues.⁠—“I,” the Assessor interrupted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wiping his brow, “I rushed on hard behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bear; but the <span xml:lang="pl">Pan Wojski</span> cried, ‘Stand still.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But how stand still? The bear was straight advancing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the plain, on rushing like a hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Further and further, till I had no breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No hope to overtake him. Lo! I looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the right; he stopped, and here the forest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was thinner, so I measured with my glance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Stand still,’ I thought;⁠—<i xml:lang="it">e basta</i>, there he lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifeless! A fine gun this! true Sagalas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘<i xml:lang="pl">Sagalas London à Balabanowka</i>’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inscription; there a famous gunsmith lived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Pole, who manufactured Polish guns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the English manner them adorned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How?” snorts the Assessor; “many hundred bears!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not that one nigh kill you? What a story!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Just listen then,” the Regent answered back;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here’s no court of inquiry, sir; this is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hunt; I take all here as witnesses.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then a fierce quarrel ’mid the crowd began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some took the Assessor’s, some the Regent’s side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy none remembered, for they all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had run up from the sides, nor had observed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What passed in front. The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> gathered voice:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“At least this time the quarrel is for something;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This, gentlemen, is not that wretched hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’tis a bear; you well may seek amends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Either with sabre, or the pistol even.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis hard to arbitrate your quarrel, so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>According to the ancient custom, we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will grant permission for a duel. I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember in my time there lived two neighbours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both honourable men and noblemen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their forefathers; they on either side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the <span xml:lang="pl">Wilejka</span> river lived. One was</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span> called, the other named Dowejko.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-141" id="noteref-141" epub:type="noteref">141</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both fired together once at a she-bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who slew ’twas hard to tell, and terribly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They quarrelled, and they swore to exchange their shots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the bear-skin. How like noblemen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Barrel to barrel nearly! And this duel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made a great noise then; songs were sung about it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At that time. I was second; how it happened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll tell you all the story from the first.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Before the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> might begin to speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy had composed the quarrel; he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went round the bear, observed it heedfully.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As last he drew his cutlass, and the muzzle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Severed in twain, and in the hinder part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the head, the substance of the brain dividing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He found the ball. He drew it forth, and cleaned it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his coat, then measured with the cartridge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adjusted to the gun, and then his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uplifting, and the bullet in his hand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sirs!” said he; “not from your guns is this ball.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It comes from this <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span> single-barrel”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here raised he the old flint-lock, with a band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Engirdled round⁠—“but ’twas not I that fired it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh! that required courage; terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis to remember! dark before my eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed! For both young gentlemen were running</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight towards me, and the bear was right behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just, just above the Count’s head, last of the</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span>, although by the spindle side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Jesus! Maria!’ I cried, and the Lord’s angels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent to my help the Bernardine. He shamed us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All! O most valiant priest! While I was trembling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dared not touch the trigger, from my hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He snatched the gun, took aim, and fired! Between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two heads to fire! a hundred steps! not miss!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the very centre of the jaws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus beat the teeth in! Sirs, I long have lived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one man only have I seen who could</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By such a shot have signalised himself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fellow once among us so renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For duelling, he who was used to shoot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heels off women’s slippers;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-142" id="noteref-142" epub:type="noteref">142</a> that same rascal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above all rascals, memorable for aye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>, <i xml:lang="pl">vulgo</i> Whiskered, I do not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recall his surname! But ’tis now no time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him to go a-hunting bears; no doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The villain to his very whiskers sits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hell. But glory to the priest, for he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has saved the lives of two men, and perhaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of three. Gervasy will not praise himself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But had the last child of <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>’s blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fallen in the wild beast’s jaws, I should not now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be in the world, and mine old bones the bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had gnawed. Come, priest, your Reverence’s health</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>We’ll drink.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-143" id="noteref-143" epub:type="noteref">143</a></span>
					<span>In vain they sought the priest; they knew</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much alone, that when the beast was slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He for a moment showed himself; he sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the Count and Thaddeus; and seeing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That both were whole and sound, he raised his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To heaven, and said a silent prayer, and ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back quickly to the plains, as though pursued.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile, by order of the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, bundles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heather, twigs, and brushwood, in a pile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were thrown. The fire bursts forth, and groweth up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pine of smoke, and spreads itself aloft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In likeness of a canopy. Above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flame they crossed two hunting spears at top.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the points they hung a cauldron huge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the wagons brought out vegetables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And flour, and roasts, and bread.</span>
					<span>The Judge then opened</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lock-up bottle-case, wherein appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rows white heads of bottles; he from them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chose out the largest case of crystal; ’twas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A present from Friar Robak to the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas Dantzig <i xml:lang="pl">wódka</i>, liquor dear to Poles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Long live,” exclaimed the Judge, and lifted high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flask, “the town of Dantzig, once our own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shall be ours again!” and he poured out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silvery liquor round, till at the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gold began to dribble,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-144" id="noteref-144" epub:type="noteref">144</a> and to shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In the sun’s light.</span>
					<span>The <i xml:lang="pl">bigos</i> in the kettles<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-145" id="noteref-145" epub:type="noteref">145</a></span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was warming. It were hard to express in words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wondrous taste of <i xml:lang="pl">bigos</i>, colour, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its wondrous odour. One may hear the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of words, and sequences of rhymes, but yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The citizen digestion cannot prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their substance; for, to value at the full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Litvanian songs and dishes, one must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In health, live in the country, be returning</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>From hunting.</span>
					<span>Still, without these preparations,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="pl">Bigos</i> is not a dish to be despised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it is artfully compounded of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The choicest vegetables; one must take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chopped pickled cabbage, which, as says the proverb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goes of itself into the mouth; enclosed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within a kettle, let its bosom moist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ercover chosen pieces of best meat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let it simmer till the fire express</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All vital juices, till the boiling liquor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spurts from the vessel’s borders, and the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around is with its odour redolent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The <i xml:lang="pl">bigos</i> now was ready. All the huntsmen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With threefold <i xml:lang="pl">vivat</i>, armed with spoons, ran up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stirred the vessel. Roared the brass, the smoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burst forth, the <i xml:lang="pl">bigos</i> disappeared like camphor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It vanished, fled; and in the cauldron’s mouths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steam alone was boiling, as within</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The crater of extinct volcanoes.</span>
					<span>When</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They all had eat and drunk their fill, they mounted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On horseback. All were in high spirits, all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were full of talk, except the Assessor and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Regent. They were angrier now to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than yesterday; they quarrelled with each other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the virtues, one of his <span xml:lang="pl">Sanguszko</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rifle, the other of his Sagalas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count likewise, and Thaddeus unjoyful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rode on, and felt ashamed because they missed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had retired, for he in Litva who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has let the beast escape the toils must labour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long ere he may redeem his reputation.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Count declared he first had seized the spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thaddeus would not let him meet the beast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thaddeus maintained, that being of the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stronger, and the better skilled to wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heavy spear, he would forestall the Count.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus talked they ’mid the murmur and the noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of all the throng.</span>
					<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> in the centre</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rode; merry was the good old man beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His usual custom, full of conversation.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, wishing to amuse the quarrellers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring them to agree, the story of</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span> and <span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span> ended thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Assessor, if I wished that thou shouldst fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A duel with the Regent, do not think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I am eager after human blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbid it, Heaven! I wished but to amuse you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give you as it were a comedy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to renew that same conceit, which I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imagined forty years ago⁠—it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most excellent! You all are young, you do not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember this, but in my time it made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forests loud ev’n to <span xml:lang="pl">Podlachia</span>’s woods.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“<span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span> and <span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span>’s disputes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came from a strange cause, likeness of their names</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most inconvenient! For in time of <i xml:lang="pl">sejmiks</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When that <span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span>’s friends were gaining o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Supporters, some one whispered to a noble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Vote for <span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span>;’ and he, hearing but</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imperfectly, his vote gave to <span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When at a feast Marshal <span xml:lang="pl">Rupejko</span> once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proposed a health, ‘Long live <span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span>!’ others</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried out ‘<span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span>!’ And who midmost sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could never get it right, especially</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In speaking indistinct of dinner-time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It came to even worse. One day in Wilna,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some drunken noble with <span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span> fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And got two sabre wounds. And later on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That nobleman, returning home from Wilna,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By strange hap crossed the ferry with <span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in one boat they crossed o’er the <span xml:lang="pl">Wilejka</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He asks his neighbour, ‘Who is that?’⁠—‘<span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span>,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The answer was. Without delay, this noble</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whips forth his rapier from beneath his cloak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cut <span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span> underneath the whiskers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking he was <span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span>. But at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As for the finishing stroke, it needs must be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That at a hunting party thus it chanced:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The namesakes stood, and at the same she-bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together fired. ’Tis true, she lifeless fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After their shots; but she already bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ten bullets in her body; many persons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had guns of like calibre; who had slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The she-bear? Well, find out! But by what means?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Here then they cried: ‘Enough, the thing must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once for all ended. Whether God or devil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joined us, we must be parted. Two of us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like two suns, are too many in the world.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So to their sabres, and they stood at distance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both honourable men, the more the nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surround them, the more fiercely on each other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They strike. They changed their weapons; and from sabres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It came to pistols; and they stood. We cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they too nearly have approached the standpoints.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They in pure spite swore then to fire across</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bear-skin! death inevitable! nearly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One barrel to the other! both sure shots!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Be second now, <span xml:lang="pl">Hreczecha</span>!’ I replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Agreed; but let the sexton dig a grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once, for such a quarrel cannot end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In nothing; fight like noblemen, and not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like butchers. ’Tis enough to place the standpoints</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More near; I see that you are desperadoes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will you then fight, the barrels on your chests?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not suffer this. Agreed, let it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pistols be, but at no greater distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or less, than o’er the bear-skin. I, as second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mine own hands will stretch it on the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I myself will station you; you, sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one side, stand upon the muzzle’s end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you, sir, on the tail.’⁠—‘Agreed!’ they shouted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘The time?’⁠—‘To-morrow.’⁠—‘Place?’⁠—‘The tavern Usza!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rode away. But I went to my Virgil.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A shout the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> interrupted: “<span xml:lang="pl">Vytcha</span>!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And right from underneath the horses’ hoofs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darted a hare. Now Kusy, and now Sokol</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursued him. To the hunt the dogs were brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since on returning one might easily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hare encounter on the plain. The dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the horses free from leashes ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when they saw the hare, straightway, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunters urged them, swiftly they pursued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Regent and the Assessor too would urge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their horses onward; but the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> stayed them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crying: “Ware! stand and look on! I allow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one to stir from this place by a step.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hence we all shall well observe; the hare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is going to the plains.” In truth the hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perceiving dogs and hunters close behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed headlong to the plain; his long ears he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a roe’s two horns erected. O’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plain he spread himself, his legs, stretched out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath him like four rods appearing. Well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might one have said he moved them not, but only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skimmed o’er the surface of the earth, like swallow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kissing the waters. Dust behind him, dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind the dust; from far away it seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hare, and dogs, and greyhounds formed one body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though some sort of viper o’er the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were gliding, with the hare as head, the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The snake’s blue length, that like a double tail</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Kept wagging to and fro the dogs.</span>
					<span>The Regent</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Assessor gazed; their lips stood open;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They held their breath. At once the Regent turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale as a linen cloth, the Assessor pale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned also. They behold, most fatally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It chanced. The further off that viper ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The more it lengthened, and it broke in two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now vanished was that neck of dust, the head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already neared the wood; the tails, where are they?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind. The head had vanished; once it seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As some one waved a tassel; it had entered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wood; the tail broke off beside the wood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The poor dogs, stupefied, beneath the thicket</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran, seeming to take counsel, and accuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other. They at last return; they slowly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring o’er the brushwood, drooping low their ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their tails close pressed unto their chests, and when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had approached, they scarce dared raise their eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For very shame, and ’stead of going to</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Their masters, stood upon one side.</span>
					<span>The Regent</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drooped down his gloomy brow upon his breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Assessor cast a glance, but one unjoyful.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then to the hearers both would demonstrate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How that their greyhounds were unused to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unleashed, how unforeseen the hare ran out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How ill they set upon him, in a field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the dogs truly should have put on boots;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So full it was of pebbles and sharp stones.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wise things expounded these experienced prickers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sportsmen might therefrom have reaped much profit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they did not attend with diligence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some began whistling, others laughed aloud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some, having in their memory the bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him talked. With the late hunt occupied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> scarce had glanced upon the hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seeing it escape, turned round his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indifferently, his interrupted story</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concluding: “Where did I leave off? Ah! ha!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just where I took them both so at their word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fire at one another o’er the bear-skin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noblemen cried out ’twas certain death!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Barrel to barrel nearly. But I laughed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my friend Maro taught me that a bear-skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not a paltry measure; for you know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How when Queen Dido sailed to Libya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She with the greatest trouble, for herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Purchased such piece of land as might be covered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er with an ox-hide; and she founded Carthage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon this bit of land.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-146" id="noteref-146" epub:type="noteref">146</a> So in the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>This passage I discussed with care.</span>
					<span>“The day</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had scarce begun; from one side in a carriage</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span> drove, <span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span> from the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On horseback came. They look; across the river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold a hairy bridge, a girdle of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bear-skin cut up into strips. I placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span> on the beast’s tail on one side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span> on the other. ‘Now,’ I said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bang off at one another, though it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your whole life long, but I’ll not let you go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till you are friends together.’ Both were furious;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But here the nobles rolled upon the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With laughter, and the priest and I with solemn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Words, from the Gospels now, now from the Statutes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discoursed to them. There was no help for it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They laughed, and were obliged now to be friends.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Their quarrel changed into a lifelong friendship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Dowejko</span> wed the sister of <span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Domejko</span> also wed his brother’s sister.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They shared their property in equal halves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the spot where this had come to pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They built a tavern, calling it the Bear.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
