<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book V: Diplomacy and the Chase</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Diplomacy and the Chase</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Telimena’s hunting plans⁠—The gardening nymph comes out into society, and receives the instructions of her guardian⁠—The hunters’ return⁠—Great astonishment of Thaddeus⁠—The second meeting in the Sanctuary of Meditation, and reconciliation effected by means of ants⁠—The subject of the hunt is discussed at table⁠—The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s story of <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span> and Prince Denassau interrupted⁠—The conclusion of conditions between the parties, likewise interrupted⁠—An apparition with a key⁠—The quarrel⁠—The Count and Gervasy enter on a council of war.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Having the chase thus ended gloriously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> from the pine-woods home returns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Telimena now begins a hunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep in the lonely mansion. She indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat motionless, with hands upon her lap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Folded; but she two heads of game pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thought; considered best how to surround</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The two of them, and how best hunt them down;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count and Thaddeus. The Count, he was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A young lord, heir of a great family,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good-looking very, and already somewhat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In love; but what of that? he well might change.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, did he love sincerely? Did he wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To marry with a woman some years older,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not rich? Will his relations suffer it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>What will the world say?</span>
					<span>Telimena, thus</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Considering, from the sofa rose, and stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her full height; one might say her stature grew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She somewhat bared her bosom, bent aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with attentive eyes herself reviewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And once again asked counsel of the mirror.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment past, she dropped her eyes, and sighed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And sat down.</span>
					<span>Well, the Count was a young lord,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rich men are inconstant in their tastes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count was fair-complexioned, they are not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over emotional. And Thaddeus?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was simplicity its very self,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A good boy, very near unto a child!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He now begins for the first time to love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if looked after, will not easily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These first bonds sever; and besides, he is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obliged to Telimena. Men, while young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though changing in their thoughts, are in emotions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far steadier than their grandsires; they possess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A conscience. Simple is a young man’s heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And maidenlike, and long it will retain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For love’s first sweetness gratitude, and will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both welcome joy, and bid farewell to it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pleasure, like a modest banquet shared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With friends; the ancient debauchee alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose entrails are already scorched, doth loathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That drink wherewith he drenched him to excess.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These things to Telimena well were known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she had wit and great experience.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But what will people say? Why then, depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out their sight, to other parts remove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live in retirement, or far better yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remove entirely from the neighbourhood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As for example, go a little journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the capital, and introduce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young lad to the world, direct his steps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be his helper and his counsellor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And form his heart, to have in him a friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A brother, and at length⁠—enjoy the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>While years suffice.</span>
					<span>Thus thinking, through the alcove</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gaily and boldly many times she passed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Again she dropped her eyes.</span>
					<span>It seemed worth while</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Count’s destiny to think; would it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not answer to push Sophy in his way?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was not rich, but in her birth his equal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of senatorial house, a dignitary’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter. And if this marriage come to pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Telimena for the future owns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sure asylum in their house, as being</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia’s relation, and the Count’s betrother.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this young couple she will be a mother.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When she this plan of action thus had formed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In council with herself, she called Sophia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Who in the orchard was at play.</span>
					<span>Sophia,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In morning dress, and with uncovered head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood, in her hands a sieve upraised. Around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her feet the poultry hastened. On one side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tufted hens pressed forward in a knot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the crested cocks, upon their heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaking the coral helmets; with their wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oaring their way through furrows and through bushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Widely their spur-armed feet they stretch. Behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bloated turkey slowly pushes on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snorting at grumbles of his noisy spouse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither, like rafts almost, with lengthy tails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steer o’er the meadow, and at times descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like flakes of snow, the pigeons silver-plumed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In centre of a circle of green turf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poultry circle, noisy, stirring, crowds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Engirdled by a band of pigeons, like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A snowy ribbon, varied in the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By stars, by spots, by stripes. Here amber beaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There coral crests, from out the depth of plumage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like fish from under waves, rock to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like water-tulips; thousand eyes like stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Gleam towards Sophia.</span>
					<span>In the centre she</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towered high above the birds, herself all white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a fountain, playing amid flowers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er wings and heads she scattered from the sieve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pearl-white hand, a plenteous, pearly rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wheaten grains. Such grain, of noble tables</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthy, is used to make Litvanian <i xml:lang="pl">rosol</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-147" id="noteref-147" epub:type="noteref">147</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia from the household stores abstracts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This grain to feed her poultry, doing mischief</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Unto the housekeeping.</span>
					<span>She heard the call</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of “Sophy!” ’twas her aunt’s voice. So she flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dainty’s last remains unto the birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And twirling round the sieve, as dancers twirl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tambourine around, and beating time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon it, did the playful girl skip o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peacocks, pigeons, hens. The birds, confused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did flutter upwards all tumultuously.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia, the ground scarce touching with her feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared to soar the highest among them all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before her the white doves, which in her course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She startled, flew as though before the car</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of Pleasure’s lovely goddess.</span>
					<span>In Sophia</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew through the window, with a joyous cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rested on her aunt’s lap, out of breath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Telimena, kissing her, and stroking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the chin, considered with delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The child’s high spirits, and her beauty, for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She truly loved her charge. But now again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her features she composed to gravity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She rose, and walking to and fro along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The alcove, with her finger on her lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Pronounced these words:</span>
					<span>“My dear Sophia, you quite</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forget your age and station; this same day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You end your fourteenth year. It now is time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To abandon cocks and turkeys. Fie! a fit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amusement for a dignitary’s daughter!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you have been caressing at your will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unwashed children of the peasantry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look upon you, Sophy, grieves my heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your face is tanned quite horribly, just like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A very gipsy. And you walk and move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quite like a country girl. Now, for the future</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will amend all this, to-day begin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will bring you out into the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the drawing-room, unto the guests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We now have many guests here. Take thou heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou dost not make me be ashamed of thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sophia sprang up from her seat, and clapped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her hands with joy, and with both arms she hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About her aunt’s neck; and by turns she laughed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And wept aloud with joy.</span>
					<span>“Oh! auntie, ’tis</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So long since I saw any visitors!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since here I have been living among hens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chickens, I have only seen one guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wood-pigeon; and I am just a little</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wearied of sitting here in the alcove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even the Judge says it is bad for health.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The Judge,” her aunt broke in, “was constantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tormenting me to bring thee out into</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Society; he mutters to my face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou already art grown up; he knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not what he says; the old man never lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In good society. But I know better</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How long a damsel must have been prepared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cause sensation, entering in the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For know, Sophia, that when young persons grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In people’s very sight, though fair, though witty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They can cause no sensation, where all folks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were used to see them from a child. But let</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A finished, grown-up damsel suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shine forth, from neither here nor there, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world, then all around her press, desiring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see her; they consider all her movements,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every look; they listen to her words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repeat them unto others; and when once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A damsel is the fashion, every one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must praise her, even though she please them not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I trust thou knowest how to find thy level;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou in the capital hast grown up. Though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast lived for two years in this neighbourhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast not quite forgotten Petersburg.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, Sophy, make your toilet, from the bureau;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in it thou wilt find all things for dressing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make haste, for they will soon be back from hunting.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A lady’s maid and serving-girl were called;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pail of water in a silver basin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-148" id="noteref-148" epub:type="noteref">148</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was poured. Sophia, like a sparrow in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sand, did flutter, hands and face, and neck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She washed; and Telimena all her stores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Petersburg did open, of perfumes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pomades; with choice perfume she sprinkled o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia, the odour filled the room, she smoothed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her locks with gum. Sophia then put on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White silken stockings, and morocco shoes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thin white leather; meanwhile were her stays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laced by the lady’s maid, who over her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then threw a dressing-jacket; then were pinched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The papilottes with heated tongs; the curls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not being too short, were woven in two braids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The locks upon her forehead waving free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But freshly gathered cornflowers in a braid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woven, the servant brought to Telimena,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who fastened them with skill to Sophy’s locks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passing from right to left; the flowers stood forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pleasing contrast with the light fair locks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though with corn-ears; then the dressing-gown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Removed, the toilet all was done. Sophia</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threw on a white frock o’er her head; her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held a white cambric handkerchief; and thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She looked completely like a lily white.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The last completing touch to locks and dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now given, she received command to walk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the chamber, and again its length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Telimena, with a practised eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reviewed her niece, grew angry, shrugged her shoulders;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at Sophia’s curtseying, in despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She cried, “Ah me! Sophia, thou seest now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What ’tis to live with birds and shepherd folk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou standest with thy feet apart, just like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A boy, and starest round to right and left.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thorough hoyden! Curtsey! See how awkward!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Oh! auntie,” cried Sophia, quite sadly; “how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am I to blame? You kept me shut up, auntie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I had none to dance with; and I liked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From very weariness to nurse the children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feed the poultry; wait a little, auntie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me but be a little among people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you shall see how I will cure myself.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“In truth,” her aunt replied, “of two bad things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis better far to live with birds, than with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those vulgar folks who late were guests with us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That parish priest for ever muttering prayers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or playing draughts, and that solicitor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his pipe! Nice cavaliers! and pretty manners</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You would have learned from them. But now at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s somebody to whom to show oneself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We in the house have some distinguished guests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mind, Sophia, there’s a young Count here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gentleman of breeding, kinsman to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A <span xml:lang="pl">Wojewode</span>; remember, pray, to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Polite to him.”</span>
					<span>The neigh of horses near,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hunters’ murmurs were already heard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are near the door already. “There they are!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seizing by the hand Sophia, she ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the drawing-room. As yet the hunters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had entered not the room; they first must change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their dresses, for they had no wish to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ladies in their shooting jackets. First</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the young men Master Thaddeus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Count entered, soon as well might be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Telimena fills a hostess’ duties,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She welcomes those incoming, places them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And entertaineth them with conversation.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To every one in turn presents her niece;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thaddeus first, as a near relative.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia politely curtseyed; he bowed low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wished to speak to her, half-oped his lips;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But looking in her eyes such trouble seized him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That standing dumb before her, he now blushed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now grew pale. What was within his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself he guessed not, but he felt himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most miserable, for he knew Sophia;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew her by her stature, her bright hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her voice; that form, that little head, he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the garden wall, and that sweet voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had woken him unto the hunt to-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> from this aberration</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roused Thaddeus, and seeing him so pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unsteady on his feet, he counselled him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To go and lie down in his room. Within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A corner Thaddeus stood, against the chimney</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaning, nought saying, his wide, wandering eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now turning on the aunt, now on the niece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well Telimena marked what strange effect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This first sight of Sophia upon him made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She guessed not all; but yet, howe’er embarrassed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She entertained the guests, while from her glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She lost him not. At last her time observing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She ran towards him; was he well? why sad?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She asked, insisted; of Sophia she spoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to jest with him. Still Thaddeus stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmoving, leaning on his elbow, nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replying, with knitted brow and twitching lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus still more to Telimena caused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confusion and surprise. She changed at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her countenance, and the tone of her discourse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She rose up angrily, with bitter words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to heap reproach and taunt on him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thaddeus started, ev’n as though a sting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had pierced him through; he looked away, and coloured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unspeaking. Then he kicked his chair away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rushed from out the room, and slammed the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But happily to none this scene had meaning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Except to Telimena.</span>
					<span>Through the gate</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fled, and straightway rushed into the field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a pike, pierced by a fish-spear through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Splashes and plunges, thinking thus to fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though dragging rope and iron along with him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Thaddeus after him vexation drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he o’er ditches and o’er hedges sprang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without a goal, or settled road. Around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wandered not a little time; at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He entered in a woodland depth, and came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Either by fixed design, or else by chance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon that mount, which yesterday had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The witness of his happiness, and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That billet he received, of love the token;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spot, as well we know, called Sanctuary</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of Meditation.</span>
					<span>As he looked around,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw⁠—’twas she! Alone there, Telimena!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thought deep buried, changed from yesterday</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By dress and form; in white, upon a stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself as turned to stone, her face concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within her open hands; although no sob</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was heard, he saw that she was drowned in tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In vain strove Thaddeus against his heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He pitied her, and felt by sorrow moved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long time he gazed unspeaking, while concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind a tree. At length he sighed, and spoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In anger to himself: “Fool that I am!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is she to blame because I thus mistook?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So from the tree to her he slowly turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When sudden from her seat sprang Telimena;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She threw herself to right and left, she sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the brook, with arms stretched out, with hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dishevelled, pale, she dashed into the wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She skipped about, and half knelt down, then fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unable now to rise, she writhed upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The turf; her movements showed that she endured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some torture most exceeding; she clutched fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her bosom, neck, feet, hands. Then to her side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang Thaddeus, believing she was mad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or seized with some most fearful malady.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from quite other cause these movements came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was within the neighbouring birchen grove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty ant-hill. Black and rapid swarmed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the industrious insects, through the grass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But whether it were from necessity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or for their pleasure, they especially</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To visit Meditation’s Sanctuary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delighted. From their ant-hill capital,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As far as to the border of the brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had a pathway trodden, by the which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ranks could march; and to her great mishap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In middle of this road sat Telimena.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ants, attracted by her stockings white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed on them, and began to bite and tickle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Telimena was constrained to fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shake them off, at length upon the turf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sit, and try to chase away the ants.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Assistance Thaddeus could not her refuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And making clear her dress, he bent him down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto her very feet. By chance his lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approached her forehead, in such friendly posture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though of their morning quarrel said they nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet ne’ertheless they were agreed again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How long their converse had endured none ever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can know; but suddenly the bell aroused them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span> ringing as the signal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of supper; it was time now to return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the mansion, all the more that far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was heard a crackling on the ground, may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they were sought for. It were unbecoming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They should return together; Telimena</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stole therefore by the garden to the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thaddeus took the highway to the left;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both adopting this manoeuvre felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>No little fear.</span>
					<span>It once to Telimena</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared that from behind a bush looked forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pale and hooded face of Robak. Well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw Thaddeus how at one time and again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shadow long and white appeared to left;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew not what it was; but yet an inkling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had that ’twas the Count, in long surtout</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of English cut.</span>
					<span>They supped within the castle.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The obstinate Protasy, heeding not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge’s orders, in the master’s absence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again had stormed the castle; as he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A credence intromitted thereupon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guests in order entered, and around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In circle stood; the Chamberlain then took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The highest place at table; from his years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dignity this precedence was his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In going there he to the ladies bowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old men, and the youths; the friar this time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not at table; in his place to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the right hand of her husband, sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lady of the Chamberlain. The Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he had placed the guests as fitting, spoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A prayer in Latin, blessing on the board.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then <i xml:lang="pl">wódka</i> was presented to the men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All after that sat down, and speedily</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The whitened <i xml:lang="pl">chlodnik</i> ate.</span>
					<span>The <i xml:lang="pl">chlodnik</i> done,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came crabs, asparagus, and chicken; in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their company Hungarian wines appeared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Malaga. They ate, they drank, but all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Preserved a gloomy silence. Never since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These castle walls were builded, they which had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many brother nobles feasted, heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And given back so many joyous <i xml:lang="pl">vivats</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did they remember such a gloomy supper;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only with sound of corks and clash of plates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great and empty castle halls resound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wouldst have said indeed some evil sprite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Had sealed all lips.</span>
					<span>The causes of this silence</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were many. From the toils the hunters came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sufficiently loquacious; but when cooled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ardour, when considering the chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They soon perceived that they with little glory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had come therefrom. So was it needful that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One priestly hood, that came where from Heaven knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Philip from the hemp,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-149" id="noteref-149" epub:type="noteref">149</a> should so surpass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunters of the district? Shame! oh! shame!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What would be said concerning this affair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Oszmiano, and in Lida, which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many ages with their district had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contended for precedence in the chase?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They thought of this.</span>
					<span>The Regent and Assessor</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had also in their memories the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ill-will between them, likewise they remembered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their greyhounds’ shame; before their eyes still stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That naughty hare; his long legs stretching out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from beneath the thicket them defying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wagging his tail; and with that tail he lashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hearts as with a whip. They sat with faces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent downwards to their plates. The Assessor had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another grievance to lament, as he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Telimena and his rivals gazed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sat by Thaddeus, but, all confused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce dared to glance at him; the gloomy Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She made endeavour to beguile, to challenge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To longer conversation, and to bring him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To better humour. For the Count had come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back strangely cross from walking, or the rather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Thaddeus imagined, from his ambush.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing, he raised his forehead boldly, frowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looked well-nigh with scorn upon her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew as near Sophia as well he might, then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And poured out wine for her, and brought her plates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand courtesies performing, bowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smiled; but sometimes turned away his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sighed full deeply. But in spite of such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deceit adroitly played, ’twas evident</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all these coquetries were merely played</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From spite to Telimena; for round turning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though unwittingly, he gazed on her</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With dreadful glance.</span>
					<span>She could not understand</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What this should signify; her shoulders shrugging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She thought unto herself, he must be mad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then of the Count’s new wooing pretty glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>She turned towards her other neighbour.</span>
					<span>Thaddeus,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In deep gloom likewise buried, nothing ate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor drank, he seemed to listen to discourse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kept his eyes close fixed upon his plate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Telimena poured out wine for him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He angry grew at her officiousness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took it ill⁠—one day had changed him so⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Telimena was so quick to woo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shocked him that her dress was cut so low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed immodest; when he raised his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As fearing so to do, far sharper now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were, for scarcely on her rosy cheeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rested, when he quick became aware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a most terrible and frightful secret;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Good heavens! she wore rouge!</span>
					<span>It might have been</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rouge was of a bad sort, or rubbed off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The face by accident; it here and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was thinner, and revealed the coarser skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below; may be that Thaddeus himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Meditation’s Sanctuary, too close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conversing with her, from the white had brushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The carmine, lighter even than the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From wings of butterflies, and Telimena,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning in a hurry from the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had found no time her colours to repair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around her lips especially were freckles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eyes of Thaddeus now, like cunning spies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discovering one treason, all around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began a visitation with the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all her beauties, and in every part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To track some falsehood out; two teeth were gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out her mouth, and on her brow appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some wrinkles, on her temples, and a thousand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wrinkles lurked concealed beneath her chin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alas! now Thaddeus felt how needless ’tis</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To scan a lovely thing too closely, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How shameful to be spy upon his love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How wicked even to change one’s taste and heart!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who may rule their hearts? He tried in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loss of love by conscience to supply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the light-rays of her glance again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To warm his spirit’s chillness. For that glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now like a moonbeam bright, but void of heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Played o’er the surface of his spirit, frozen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to the very depths. Lamenting and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself reproaching, he bowed down his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Was still, and bit his lips.</span>
					<span>Meantime an evil</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit allured him with temptation new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made him list to what Sophia said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the Count. The damsel, vastly glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the Count’s courtesy, first blushed, and drooped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her eyes; the Count, ’twas seen, was praising her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By flattery most delicate, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They both began to laugh; at length they talked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of some unlooked-for meeting in a garden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some trampling over garden-beds and burdocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Thaddeus, listening to the utmost, heard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bitter words he swallowed, in his soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Digested them; he had a dreadful banquet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a viper in a garden drains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With double tongue herbs venomous, then twists</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself up in a coil, and on the path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies, threatening the unwary foot that treads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon him unforeseen, so Thaddeus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With envy’s poison drunken, outwardly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared indifferent, with spite yet bursting.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let but a few in merriest company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be angry, all at once their gloominess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is shed upon the rest. The hunters long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had silent been; and on the other side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There too was silence at the table; they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were all infected by contagion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that ill-humour shown by Thaddeus.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And even the Chamberlain, in this deep gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So unaccustomed, had no will to talk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On seeing how his daughters, pretty girls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dowered well, and in the flower of youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were silent, by the silent youths neglected.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hospitable Judge was like concerned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, noting general silence round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said this was not a Polish supper, but</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wolfish one. Hreczecha did possess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ear to silence very sensitive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself was a great talker, and he loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All chattering greatly. ’Twas no wonder; he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had spent his life in banquets, expeditions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hunts, and diets. He was used to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each moment something drumming in his ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he kept silence even, or was stealing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fly-scare to smite down a fly, or when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat him down to dream with closed eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By day he sought for conversation; even</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By night he must be counting o’er his beads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or telling fables. Therefore was he aye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A deadly enemy unto the pipe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invented by the Germans to convert us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To foreigners; he always used to say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Make Poland dumb, ’tis making Poland German.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-150" id="noteref-150" epub:type="noteref">150</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man, having passed an age in noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In noise desired to rest. And silence woke him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From slumber. Millers thus are lulled to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By rattle of their mill-wheels; scarcely stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The axles still, than they awake exclaiming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In anguish, “And the Word became”⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-151" id="noteref-151" epub:type="noteref">151</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> Unto the Chamberlain signed with a bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with light movement beckoning from his lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the Judge, entreated to be heard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once both gentlemen at this mute sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did bow, as saying, We entreat you; so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> in this wise began to speak:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I venture to entreat the young men here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To entertain themselves at supper in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancient fashion, not keep still and chew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are we then Capuchins? Who ever keeps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mid nobles silence, does the same as does</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sportsman who allows a charge to rust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his gun. I for this reason praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our forefathers’ loquacity; they went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To table after hunting, not alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To eat, but talk out mutually those things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which each had nearest to his own heart; praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And censure, marksmen, beaters, mastiffs, shots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were called upon the place; a shout arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet as another hunt to sportsmen’s ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know, I know what ails ye! All this cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sable cares<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-152" id="noteref-152" epub:type="noteref">152</a> has risen from Robak’s hood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are ashamed of missing. Let not shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consume you; I have better hunters known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than you are, and they missed. To hit and miss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still improve, that is the hunter’s course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself, although from childhood I have borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gun, have sometimes missed. That famous hunter</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Tuloszczyk</span> sometimes missed. The late <span xml:lang="pl">Pan Rejtan</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not invariably hit. Of <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll tell you later on. But as to what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concerns the bear escaping from the toils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the young gentlemen did not, as fitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Engage the beast, although they had a spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one will praise this, neither blame. To fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With charge already loaded, formerly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had shown a man a coward of cowards; and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fire off blindly, as too many do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not letting come the beast in rifle range,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor taking aim, were a disgraceful thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who well measureth, and lets the beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approach him as is fitting, though he miss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May without shame retire, or with the spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Engage him, but of free will, not compulsion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the spear to hunters is not given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make attack, but for their own defence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so believe me, and your drawing back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take ye not thus to heart, beloved Thaddeus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you, most powerful Count. But often as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You shall recall this day’s events, remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancient <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s warning; let not one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus place himself upon another’s way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor either let the two of you again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Together measure at like game.”</span>
					<span>Soon as</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> had this latter word pronounced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Assessor whispered half aloud, “Like <em>dame</em>.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-153" id="noteref-153" epub:type="noteref">153</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bravo!” exclaimed the young men. Murmurs rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laughter; they repeated all around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hreczecha’s warning, chiefly the last words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And others, laughing loud, said, “At one dame.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Regent whispered, “Woman;” the Assessor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Coquette,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-154" id="noteref-154" epub:type="noteref">154</a> on Telimena fixing eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Sharp-piercing as stilettos.</span>
					<span>Never thought</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancient <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> to upbraid a soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor marked he what they whispered all around;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But glad indeed that he had caused to laugh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ladies and the young men, he turned round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the hunters, wishing likewise these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gladden. He began, outpouring wine:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“In vain my eyes do seek the Bernardine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should be glad to tell him a strange chance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like that occurrence of our hunt to-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> said he only knew one man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As true a shot as Robak from so far;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I have known another, just as good⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saved two gentlemen. Myself I saw it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The time when, in the Naliboko woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our nuncio, Thaddeus <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span>, and the Prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Denassau went to hunt. These gentlemen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did envy not the glory of that noble;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rather, they were first to drink his health</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At table, and bestowed on him great gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unnumbered, and the skin of the slain boar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concerning this wild boar, likewise the shot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will relate the tale, for I was present</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As an eye-witness, and it much resembled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day’s occurrence; but it chanced unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greatest hunters of my time, our envoy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Rejtan, and Prince Denassau.”</span>
					<span>But just then</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge, his goblet filling up, began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I drink the health of Robak; in your hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>! If we may not make rich a friar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By presents, let us try at least to pay him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For powder spent. We may be sure the bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain in the forest, will two years at least</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The convent kitchen furnish forth. But I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not bestow the skin upon the priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For either I must take it back by force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else the friar must from humility</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abandon it, or I must buy it back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even with a tithe of sable. Let us then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestow this skin according to our will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servant of the Lord already has</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chiefest garland ta’en and highest praise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let then the Most Illustrious Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adjudge the gift to him who has deserved</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The second prize.”</span>
					<span>The Chamberlain then smoothed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His forehead, and half shut his eyes. The hunters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to murmur; each one something said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one how he had first espied the beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other how he wounded it; one there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had called the dogs, another had driven back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The game into the toils. The Regent quarrelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the Assessor, one extolling loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The excellence of his Sanguszko gun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The other of his Sagalas.</span>
					<span>“My neighbour!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Judge,” said the Chamberlain at last, “most justly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servant of the Lord has won the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reward; but ’tis not easy to decide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who next to him in glory stands. For all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appear to me in merit equal; all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alike in skill, experience, courage seem.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However, fate distinguished two to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By danger; two men nearest were unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The creature’s claws; the Count and Thaddeus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The skin is theirs. But Master Thaddeus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am sure, will waive his right, as of the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The younger, and related to our host.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take then, Sir Count, the <i xml:lang="la">spolia opima</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-155" id="noteref-155" epub:type="noteref">155</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let these spoils your hunting-chamber deck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be it a memory of this day’s sport,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An emblem of the hunter’s fortune, spur</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To future glory.”</span>
					<span>Here he ceased, in joy,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believing that the Count was much rejoiced.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew not how he pierced his breast with grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For at the mention of the hunting-chamber</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count, despite himself, upraised his eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those heads of stags, those branching horns, a forest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of laurels planted by the fathers’ hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As garlands for their sons; those columned rows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adorned with portraits, and that shining crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The half-goat on the archèd roof, called loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On every side, with voices of the past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He roused him from his dreams, remembered where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was, and whose guest. He, the proper heir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span>, in his fathers’ halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A banquet-sharer of <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>, foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Eternal of his race.</span>
					<span>With bitter laugh</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He answered thus: “My house is far too small;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s no place in it worthy of a gift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of such magnificence. Let then the bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rest here among these hornèd beasts, until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge will condescend to give it me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Together with the castle.”</span>
					<span>Quickly guessed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain the thing of which he spake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tapped his golden snuff-box, asking hearing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You are of praise deserving, neighbour Count,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, “in that to business you attend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At dinner even; not like men of fashion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of your age, who without a reckoning live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll pledge myself, and do desire to end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By compromise my verdict. Heretofore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The only difficulty doth consist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the court foundation. But I have a plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of making an exchange, and compensating</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With land for the foundation, in this wise;”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here in order he began to unfold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In order, as he aye was wont to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plan of this exchange. Already half</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The subject he had ended, when began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sudden movement at the table’s end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some there observed an object strange; they pointed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards it; others ran there with their eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the heads at last, like ears of corn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent backwards by the wind, turned towards the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Opposing, to a corner.</span>
					<span>From that corner,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where hung the portrait of the dead man, last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span>, of the Pantler, from</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little door, among the columns hidden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glided a silent figure, like a phantom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy by his face and height they knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the silver half-goats on his vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of yellow. Like a pillar stepped he forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upright, severe, and mute, nor doffed his cap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor bowed his head; he bore a gleaming key</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a dagger; straightway did he ope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cabinet, and straight began to wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A something in it.</span>
					<span>In two corners of</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hall there stood, against the pillars leaning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two ancient clocks with chimes, in cabinets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enclosed. The old and crazy things had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long in discordance with the sun; they oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would point out noon at sunset. No idea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy had of mending the machines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But would not leave the clocks unwound, so long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each even he tortured with the key the clocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the time of winding had arrived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while the Chamberlain kept speaking still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concerning the affairs of both the parties,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lifted up the weight; the rusty wheels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did gnash their broken teeth; the Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did shudder, and break off. “My brother,” cried he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Postpone thy busy labour.” Then he ended</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His project of exchange. But in despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> pulled this time with greater force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The second weight; the bullfinch then that sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the summit of the clock began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fluttering its wings, to chirp the chime-notes out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bird with art was fashioned; pity ’twas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it was spoiled; it groaned and squeaked, the more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The worse. The guests laughed loud. The Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Must break off once again.</span>
					<span>“Sir <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>,” cried he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Or rather screech-owl,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-156" id="noteref-156" epub:type="noteref">156</a> if you prize your beak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>I have had enough of shrieking.”</span>
					<span>But Gervasy</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betrayed no terror at this threat; he laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With dignity his right hand on the clock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his side his left. Supported thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With both hands, he exclaimed: “Sir Chamberlain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are free to jest; a sparrow smaller is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than is a screech-owl; but ’mid his own chips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is bolder than a screech-owl in another’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mansion; a <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> is no screech-owl; he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who creeps by night to strangers’ garrets is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A screech-owl, and I’ll frighten him away.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“To the door with him!” cried the Chamberlain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sir Count!” exclaimed the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, “do you see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What things are doing? Is your honour not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already stained enough, in that you eat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drink with these <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>? and was this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Needed, that I, the castle’s governor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Gervas Rembajlo</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> of <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should in my masters’ house insulted be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you endure it?” Then Protasy cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times, “Be silent! Stand aside! For I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protasy Balthasar Brzechalski, of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two names, once General of Tribunal, <i xml:lang="pl">vulgo</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wozny, perform a Wozny’s summoning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Formal revision, summoning all here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These well-born persons present, witnesses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summoning the Assessor to inquiry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the behalf of the Most Powerful Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>; for incursion, that is, trespass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the boundary; for violence done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the castle, which the Judge by right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rules over, whereof here is open proof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that he eats therein!”⁠—“Brzechaczu,” cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, “I will teach thee!”⁠—and he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The iron keys from out his girdle, whirled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The keys about his head; with all his force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He flung them. Like a stone hurled from a sling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bunch of keys flew forth, and doubtlessly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protasy’s head had shivered; by good luck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Wozny bent aside, and thus ’scaped death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All started from their seats; deep silence reigned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment; then the Judge exclaimed: “In handcuffs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This insolent fellow! Hallo! lads!” the servants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed by the narrow way between the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And benches. But the Count then barricaded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their passage with a chair, and this weak rampart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Supported with his foot; “Ware! ware!” he cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Judge; none shall be allowed to wrong my servant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my house. He who has complaint to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against this old man, let him bring’t to me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Chamberlain then gazed askance into</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count’s eyes. “I am able, sir, to punish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without your help, an insolent petty noble.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you, Sir Count, too quickly do usurp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This castle, ere is given the decree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit still as you have sat; if you respect not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grey hairs, at least respect the highest office</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Within the district.”</span>
					<span>“As for me,” the Count</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grumbled, “I’ve had enough of idle talk!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make others weary with respect and office!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sufficient fool I have already been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In joining with you all in drinking-bouts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That end in rudeness! Give me satisfaction</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wounding of my honour! Now good-bye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till you are sober. Come with me, Gervasy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Chamberlain such answer never had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expected. He was filling up his glass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, smitten by the County’s insolence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As by a thunderbolt, his glass he rested</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against a steadfast bottle; to one side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bent his head, and lent his ear; his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stared wildly, and his lips half opened. Silent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He yet remained, but in his hand the goblet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So strongly grasped he, that the glass was shivered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud-ringing, in his eyes the liquid spirted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one had said that with the wine a fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was poured into his spirit, even so flamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His visage, and his eyes glowed. He addressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself to speak, but inarticulate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first words were ground down upon his lips;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last they flew forth from between his teeth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fool! miserable Count! I’ll⁠—Thomas! bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sabre!⁠—I will teach thee manners here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fool! damn him! offices and reverence weary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A delicate ear! I’ll cut thee round about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those precious ears! Fora! out at the door!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Thomas! my sabre!”</span>
					<span>To his side at once</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang friends. The Judge now grasped him by the hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Stop, friend, ’tis our affair! I first was challenged.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protasy, bring my sabre! Such a dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll lead him, as a bear with sticks.” But Thaddeus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restrained the Judge: “Sir uncle, is this fitting?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you, Most Powerful Chamberlain, is’t worthy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of you with such a coxcomb to engage?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are there no young men here? Leave it to me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll punish him as suits.⁠—And you, bold sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who challenge old men, we will see if you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are such a valiant knight; we’ll talk of this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow; we will choose the place and weapons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To-day depart while you are safe.”</span>
					<span>The counsel</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was good. The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> and the Count now fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into no trifling trouble. At the upper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>End of the table a loud shrieking rose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from the lower end flew bottles round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The County’s head. The frightened women all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were praying, weeping. Telimena cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Alas!” With lifted eyes she rose, and fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down in a swoon, upon the Count’s arm drooped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his breast her swan-like bosom laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count, though angry, checked his furious zeal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strove to rouse her, and to dry her tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile exposed to stool and bottle strokes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy tottered; now with tucked-up sleeves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servant throng rushed on him from all sides;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When happily Sophia, as she saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assault, with pity moved, to the old man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang forward, with her little hands wide spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She shielded him. The assailants ceased; Gervasy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew slowly backward, vanished from their eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They looked to see if he were hid beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The table, when he suddenly came forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the other side, as though emerged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From under ground, and in his powerful arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bench high-raising, like a windmill’s sails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He whirled it round, and half the hall made clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then took with him the Count, and both thus screened</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the defending bench, retired towards</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little door, and reached the threshold; yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy stood, and looked upon his foes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood awhile in thought, uncertain whether</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To draw back under arms, or once again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With newer arms his fortune try in war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He chose the second course. He lifted high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bench like battering ram behind to strike.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bent his head, with breast thrust out in front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lifted foot, he for attack prepared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he perceived the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, and he felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In spirit terror.</span>
					<span>Sitting still, the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared as deep in meditation plunged.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the beginning, when the Count began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quarrel with the Chamberlain, and when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke those threatening words unto the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> turned away; he twice took snuff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rubbed his eyes; though but a distant kinsman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the Judge, he dwelt within his house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heedful of his good friend’s safety aye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was he; and so with deep concern he gazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the fight. He lightly stretched his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the table, palm and fingers, laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon one hand a knife, the handle placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the index finger-nail; but turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards his elbow was the steely blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then balancing the hand turned somewhat back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed like sport⁠—but on the Count he gazed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The art of throwing knives, most terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In single fight, already at that time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Litva was disused, and only known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To old men; but the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> sometimes had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proved it in tavern combats, and the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excelled therein; it well might be perceived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From action of his hand, he aimed towards</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count, the last of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span>, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By spindle-side. The younger men, less heedful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew not what signified the old man’s movements.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy turned pale; with the bench he covered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count’s retreat, and to the doors retired.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Catch him!” the throng cried.</span>
					<span>As a wolf, surprised</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On sudden at his feast of carrion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will cast him blindly on the throng that break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his feast, pursue them, and proceed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tear them into pieces; all at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the canine shriek, a trigger’s click</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth sound; the wolf doth know it, searches round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perceives the huntsman there behind the dogs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one knee bending, who the barrel turns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards him, and the trigger stirreth now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wolf drops down his ears, and hies away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tail between his legs; the pack, with cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of triumph, rush upon him, tear the tufts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hair upon him. Round the beast at times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will turn, he looks, and grindeth with his jaw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the gnashing of his white tusks, scarce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pack doth threaten, when with whining cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They all disperse. Even thus Gervasy held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With threatening mien assailants all at bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eyes and bench; until he with the Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did enter in a dark and deep recess.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Catch ’em!” the cry once more arose. Not long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That triumph, for above the heads of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crowd, the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> showed him in the choir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the ancient organ, and began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tear off with loud crash the leaden pipes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smiting from above, he surely had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inflicted great disaster. But the guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tumult left the hall; the frightened servants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dared not approach; and quickly gathering up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The table-vessels, rapidly they fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In footsteps of their masters; left behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The covers, with their spoons and forks in part.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who latest did retire, not heeding blows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or threatenings, from the battle-field?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was Protasius Brzechalski. He, unmoved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood by the Judge’s chair, and with the voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of summoner his declaration made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until he ended it, and backward drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving the empty battle-field, where lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead and wounded, and a mighty ruin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No loss was there in men. But every bench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had legs put out of joint; the table, too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was lame, and naked of its table-cloth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It lay upon the plates, wine-deluged o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ’twere a knight on bloody shields, among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The many bodies of the chickens and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The turkeys, in whose breasts forks lately planted</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Remained.</span>
					<span>A little while, and everything</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the lonely castle of <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had to its rest accustomed come again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twilight thickened; the remainder of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lordly, stately banquet lay there, as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that nocturnal festival, wherein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the solemnity of ancestors,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-157" id="noteref-157" epub:type="noteref">157</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dead are gathered. Now three times had shrieked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The screech-owls in the garret, like the wizards.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-158" id="noteref-158" epub:type="noteref">158</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rising of the moon they seemed to hail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose beam fell through the window, quivering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the table, as it were a soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In purgatory; from the under-ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang rats, like damnèd souls; they gnaw, they drink.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times, forgotten in the corner, burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bottle of champagne, as if to toast<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-159" id="noteref-159" epub:type="noteref">159</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The spirits.</span>
					<span>But upon the upper floor,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within that chamber called the mirrored room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though there were now no mirrors, stood the Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the balcony against the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cooled him in the wind, upon one arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wore a surtout, but the other sleeve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And skirts were folded round his neck, and draped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The surtout like a mantle o’er his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy strode with wide steps through the hall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both, in deep thought, talked unto themselves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pistols,” the Count said; “sabres if they will.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The castle,” said the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, “and the village</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are both our own.”⁠—“The uncle, nephew,” cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count, “I’ll challenge the whole race together!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-160" id="noteref-160" epub:type="noteref">160</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The castle,” cried the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, “village, land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seize them, sir!” Saying this he turned towards</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count: “If you, my lord, do peace desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seize everything. Why go to law, Mopanku?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cause is clear as day; the castle was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos’</span> hands four hundred years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part of the revenues were wrested in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The time of Targowica, and, as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You know, were given to <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>’s rule.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not this part only we must get from them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whole, for costs of lawsuits, punishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of robbery. I always told you, sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abandon lawsuits; always told you, sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invade them, harry them! yes, thus it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In former days; who once had held the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was owner; win in field, thou also wilt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In law-courts win. And as for former quarrels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>, better is the Penknife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For them than lawsuits. But if Matthew will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lend me his Rod to help me, we will soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chop both of these <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span> up to chaff.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bravo!” the Count exclaimed; “this plan of thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gothic Sarmatian, better pleases me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than wrangling of the advocates. We’ll make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A noise throughout all Litva with this thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unheard of since the ancient times, and we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall also reap amusement. These two years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I have dwelt here, what battles have I seen?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the peasants for a boundary ridge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This enterprise of ours doth promise bloodshed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>During my travels I have been in one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Sicily a certain prince’s guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We Was I, when brigands carried to the mountains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His son-in-law, and from his relatives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daring wretches asked a ransom. We</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste collected all the serving-men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vassals, and upon the robbers fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself two brigands slew with mine own hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And first was in their fortress, setting free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prisoner. Ah! Gervasy mine! what triumph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas then! Our coming back, how beautiful!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So knightly-feudal! All the people met us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With flowers; the prince’s daughter in my arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell, grateful to the brave deliverer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When in Palermo I arrived, the whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was known already from gazettes. The women</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would point me out; there even had been printed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A novel on the whole affair, wherein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I mentioned am by name. The title of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The novel is as followeth: ‘The Pole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Mysteries of the Castle of Birbante⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocca!’ Are there within this castle dungeons?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There are enormous cellars,” said the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But they are empty; the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span> have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drunk all the wine up.”⁠—“We must arm the jockeys,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count said, “in the house; the vassalage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must summon from our own domains.”⁠—“What! lackeys!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbid it, Heaven!” Gervasy cried; “is then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A foray but a deed of villainy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever knew a foray made with peasants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lackeys? You, my lord, know nought at all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of raids. But nobles, that is something other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than vassals; they are found not on estates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the nobles’ farmsteads there in Dobrzyn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Rzesikow, in Cietycz, in Rabanki;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nobles are they from eternity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In whom flows knightly blood, all friends unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>’s family, and deadly foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>. I will gather from them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred whiskered nobles. That I’ll do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You, sir, return unto your palace, sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your fill; to-morrow there will be great work.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You love to sleep; ’tis late; the second cock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has crowed already. I will stay to guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The castle until dawn; but with the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I stand within the farmsteads of Dobrzynski.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-161" id="noteref-161" epub:type="noteref">161</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Count at these words left the balcony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ere he went he through a shot-hole gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as he viewed a multitude of lights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>’s house: “Light up!” he cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To-morrow at this hour it will be bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within this castle, in your mansion dark.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gervasy sat upon the ground, and leaned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the wall, while sank upon his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His thoughtful brow. The moonlight fell upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The summit of his bald head; with his finger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy traced upon it many strokes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He dreamed of warlike plans in coming raids;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But more and more his heavy eyelids weighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon him, and he bowed his powerless neck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt that sleep was overtaking him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as his custom was, he did begin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His evening prayers. But ’tween the Paternoster</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ave Mary wondrous phantoms rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who crowded round the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, and who whirled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About him. He beholdeth the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His former lords; some bearing sabres, others</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With truncheons; each one looks with threatening glance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His whiskers twirls, and flourishes his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or shakes his truncheon;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-162" id="noteref-162" epub:type="noteref">162</a> after them there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One silent, gloomy shade, a bloody spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his breast. Gervasy shuddered, for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He recognised the Pantler; he began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sign the cross around him, and more surely</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive off fearful dreams, he said aloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The litany for souls in purgatory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again his sight was shut; within his ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a sound. He saw a crowd of nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On horseback, and the sabres gleamed. “A foray!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A foray!” <span xml:lang="pl">Korelicz</span> and Rymsza lead them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he beheld himself on charger grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dreadful rapier lifted o’er his head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He flies, his mantle with wide-streaming folds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rustling, the cap from his left ear falls back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He flies, o’erthrowing horse and foot upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The road; at last <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span> in his barn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He burneth up. Then sank upon his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brow, with heavy dreaming weighted down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the last <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> of <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span> slept.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
