<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book III: Flirting</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Flirting</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Count’s expedition into the orchard⁠—The mysterious nymph feeds the geese⁠—Resemblance of mushroom-gathering to the walking of Elysian shades⁠—Species of mushrooms⁠—Consultations touching the destiny of Thaddeus⁠—The Count a landscapist⁠—Artistic criticisms of Thaddeus concerning trees and clouds⁠—The Count’s notions of art⁠—The bell⁠—The billet-doux⁠—“A bear, most gracious sir!”</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>The Count returned unto himself, but still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stayed his horse; and turning round his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gazed into the garden, and one time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed to him, that from the little window</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleamed the mysterious white frock again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And something light descended from above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again, and in the twinkling of an eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coursed o’er the garden, shining once again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among green cucumbers, like to a sunbeam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stol’n from behind a cloudlet, when it falls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a bit of flint upon a plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ’mid green meadows on a shallow pool.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Count dismounted, sent his servants home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself in secret towards the garden went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He reached at length the paling, in it found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An opening, and silently crept in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like wolf into a sheep-fold. By mischance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He struck some bushes of dry gooseberry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pretty gardener, as though she feared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rustle, looked around, but nothing saw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet ran she to the garden’s other side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at her side the Count, among the sorrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the burdock leaves, among the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang onwards like a frog, on hands and knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quite close to her, on, crawling silently.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last he put his head out, and beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A wondrous spectacle.</span>
					<span>In this part of</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The orchard, cherry-trees grew here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among them cereals of different kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expressly mixed together; wheat and maize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beans, long-bearded rye, and peas, and millet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even flowers and bushes. For the poultry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The housekeeper this garden had invented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her glory. Madame Poultry she was called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Mistress Turkey was her maiden name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An epoch her invention constitutes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In housekeeping, now known to every one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at that time as yet a novelty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Communicated to not many persons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under strict secrecy; before it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus published in the almanac, by title;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A remedy for hawks and kites, or a</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New means of rearing poultry.” I was such</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A garden as this one.</span>
					<span>Thus, scarce the cock</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing as sentinel, and motionless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beak upturning, and his crested head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one side bending, so that he might aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At heaven easier with his glance, may see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hawk suspended in the clouds, he crows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once the hens take refuge in this garden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even geese and peacocks, and in sudden fright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pigeons, who find no safety on the roof.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now no foe was visible in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And only the fierce heat of summer burned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The birds hid from it in that wood of corn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some lay among the grass, some slept in sand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the birds’ heads, little human ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood forth, uncovered; on them were short locks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As white as flax, necks to the shoulders bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among them sat a damsel, one head taller,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With longer locks; behind the children sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A peacock, with the circle of his plumes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide-spreading, in a rainbow many-hued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which the small fair heads, as on a picture’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Background, against the deep blue, took on lustre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defined by circle of the peacock eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a starry garland; in the corn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gleamed as though in a transparency,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the golden stalks of Indian corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With silver streaks of English clover decked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And coral mercury, and verdant mallow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mingled forms and colours seemed to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woven lattice-work of gold and silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That waved upon the wind like a light veil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Above the thicket of the many-coloured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Corn-ears and stalks, hung like a canopy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shining mist of butterflies, those called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Old women;” and whose fourfold wings, as light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As webs of spiders, and as clear as glass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suspended in the air, may scarce be seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though they make a humming, thou wouldst think</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They were immovable.</span>
					<span>The damsel waved</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A plume of grey, uplifted in one hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a bunch of ostrich feathers. She</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared therewith from off the infant heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To chase the golden rain of butterflies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in her other hand a something gleamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horn-shaped and shining. It would seem a vessel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For feeding children, for unto the lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of each in turn she neared it. In its shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It looked like Amalthea’s golden horn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus busied, ne’ertheless she turned her head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the direction of that well-remembered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trampling of gooseberry bushes; not aware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the invader drew already near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the side opposite, and like a snake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On creeping, till he from the burdocks sprang.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She looked; he stood quite near; removed from her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four garden beds apart, and low he bowed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She turned away her head, and raised her arms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like a frightened jay, she tried to fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her light feet flew already o’er the leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, frightened by the coming of the stranger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the damsel’s flight, the children shrieked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most terribly. She heard it, and she felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It were imprudent thus to leave alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little, timid children. She returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself controlling; but she must return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like an unwilling spirit, whom a wizard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compels by adjuration; she ran up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To play with the most noisy of the children.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sat beside it on the ground, she took it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon her lap, the others she caressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hand and fondling speech, until they all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again were quiet, with their little hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her knees encircling, and their little heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her close-pressing, like to little chickens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under their mother’s wing. She said: “Is it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pretty to cry like that? Is it polite?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This gentleman will be afraid. He is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not come to frighten us; he is not an old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ugly beggar. He’s a visitor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a good gentleman: just look how pretty.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She looked herself. The Count well pleased did smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And visibly was grateful unto her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so much praise. She soon bethought herself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was silent, dropped her eyes, and like a rosebud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>She blushed.</span>
					<span>A pretty gentleman he was</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In truth, of right good beauty, with a face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of oval form, pale cheeks, but of fresh hue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue eyes and gentle; long, fair hair; thereon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were leaves of plants, and grass-blades, which the Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had plucked away while crawling through the beds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like woven wreath they decked his locks with green.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O thou!” he said; “by whatsoever name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I may adore thee, be thou nymph or goddess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit or vision, speak! hath thine own will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led thee on earth, or do a stranger’s bonds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retain thee prisoner in this earthly vale?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! I guess the truth! some lover scorned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some powerful lord, or envious guardian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holds thee enchanted in this castle-park!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art worthy gallant knights should fight for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be a heroine of sad romance!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfold to me, O fair one, all the secrets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this thy cruel fate, and thou shalt here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find a deliverer! Henceforth at thy beck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou dost rule my heart, rule thou my arm!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And forth he stretched his arm.</span>
					<span>With maiden blush</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She listened, but with merry countenance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As children love to see bright-coloured pictures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or can amusement find in shining counters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before they learn their worth. These words sweet-sounding</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus did caress her hearing, though she knew not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sense. At length she asked him: “Whence, sir, come you?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What are you seeking in the garden beds?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count his eyes wide opened. Much confused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Astonished, he was still; then lowering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The style of his discourse: “I beg your pardon,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said; “young lady! I perceive that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have troubled pastime. Oh! I beg your pardon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am this moment hastening to breakfast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am already late; I wished to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In time. You know, young lady, how the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goes circling round. The garden seemed to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shorter way to reach the house.” The girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replied: “The way is here, sir, but you must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not spoil the garden beds. There is the path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the turf.” “Is it to left or right?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count demanded. Lifting her blue eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gardening-nymph appeared to search him through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With curiosity. For there the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand paces off, stood plainly seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though at arm’s length; yet he asked the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet the Count must absolutely talk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her, and sought for this some fresh excuse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Live you here, lady, near the garden? or</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There in the village? How then has it chanced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have not seen you at the manor-house?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have you not long been here? new come perhaps?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The damsel shook her head. “Pray, pardon me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young lady; is not that your chamber there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Where stands that little window?</span>
					<span>But he thought</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his heart, “If not the heroine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a romance, she seems a very young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And very pretty girl. Too often does</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A great soul, a high mind, in solitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concealèd, blossom like a rose among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A forest; ’tis enough to bring it forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the world, and place it in the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make beholders wonder at its thousand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Bright colours.”</span>
					<span>Meanwhile silently uprose</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gardening maiden; on her shoulder lifting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One child, another taking by the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driving the rest like geese before her, she</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Passed through the garden.</span>
					<span>Turning round she said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sir, cannot you drive back my runaway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poultry into the barn?” “<em>I</em> drive the poultry!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count exclaimed in wonder. She meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had vanished, in the shadows of the trees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet awhile from the espalier yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through wreaths of foliage, something gleamed athwart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As though it were two eyes.</span>
					<span>The Count alone</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood long yet in the garden. And his spirit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to the earth when once the sun is down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew gradually colder; sober hues</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assumed. He now began to dream, but he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had very disagreeable dreams indeed. He woke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not knowing against whom he felt such rage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! he had found so little; he expected</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too much! For when he crept through rows of plants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards that shepherdess, his head did burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart within him jumped. So many charms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that mysterious nymph he gazed upon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He clothed her in such marvels, guessed so many,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all things he found out were otherwise!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had indeed a pretty face, a slender</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Figure, but how unformed! and such a plumpness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cheeks, and that deep red, depainting such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excessive vulgar happiness; sure sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her mind yet slept, her heart was still unstirred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those replies, so vulgar, country-like!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wherefore delude myself?” he cried; “I have guessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too late. And my mysterious nymph, no doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Is the goose-girl!”</span>
					<span>With the nymph’s vanishing,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The magical transparency all changed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those ribbons, those resplendent lattices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold and silver, all, alas! was straw!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wringing his hands, the Count gazed on a bunch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of grass, that formed a broom, which he had taken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ostrich feathers in the damsel’s hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vessel he forgot not, made of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That horn of Amalthea!⁠—it was a carrot!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw the children gorge it eagerly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then all the charm was over! the enchantment!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The wonder!</span>
					<span>Even so when a boy perceives</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flowers of succory, with soft, light blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tempting his hand, and longs to grasp them; near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He comes, he breathes, and with the breath the flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In light down vanishes in air. And now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seeker over-curious beholds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a naked, grey-green stalk of grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Left in his hand.</span>
					<span>The Count pressed down his hat</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his brows, and by the way he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returned, but shorter made the road; he trod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er vegetables, flowers, and gooseberry bushes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, o’er the paling sprung, he breathed at last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he remembered that he spoke of breakfast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the damsel. Every one, may be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now knew the story of this meeting in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The garden, near unto the house. Perhaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They now were coming out to seek for him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They saw his flight, who knows what they may think?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So it behoved him to return. Down bending</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the hedges, ’twixt the ridges and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plants, he made a thousand turns, yet glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was, when he at last attained the path,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which straightway to the mansion courtyard led.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went beside the hedge, but from the orchard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned away his head;⁠—a thief resembling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who looketh from the granary away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give no trace of wish to visit it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or that he has already visited.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So prudent was the Count, though no one tracked him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That towards the quarter opposite the garden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Towards the right he looked.</span>
					<span>A sparse-grown thicket</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was there, all paved with turf, upon whose carpets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the white stems of the birchen-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath a tent of hanging leafy boughs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A multitude of forms were moving round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With actions strange, like dances, and strange dress.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They seemed like spirits wandering by the moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some clad in black, tight garments, some in long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flowing robes, all shining⁠—white as snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One underneath a hat like spreading hoop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bareheaded one; and others, as though wrapped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In clouds seemed walking, long veils on the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let fly, far streaming like a comet’s tail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each in a different posture; one as grown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast to the earth; his eyes alone cast down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the earth do circle round about;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One looking straight before him, forward strides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though in sleep, in a straight line; nor turns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aside to right or left. But all bend down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To various sides, unto the very ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though they made deep bows. If they draw near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or meet each other, they do neither speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor do salute each other. Deep in thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buried within themselves, the Count beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In them an image of Elysian shades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, though by pains or fears unreachable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wander on peacefully and still, though gloomy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who would have guessed these scarcely moving folk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those silent people, were our old acquaintance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge’s friends? They from their noisy breakfast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went forth unto the solemn ceremony</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mushroom-gathering. Like heedful folk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They knew how they should mark their speech and action,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So as to suit them both to place and time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In every circumstance. And for this reason,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere to the thicket followed they the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They took on different forms, and change of dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rain-cloaks of linen, that for walking served,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith they hid the top of the <i xml:lang="pl">kontusz</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on their heads indued they hats of straw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence seemed they white, like purgatory souls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the young people likewise seemed disguised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excepting Telimena and some others,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Who wore the French costume.</span>
					<span>The Count this scene</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could comprehend not, neither did he know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This country custom, so in measureless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amazement he unto the thicket ran.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of mushrooms there was plenty!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref-89" epub:type="noteref">89</a> <i xml:lang="pl">Krasnolice</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref-90" epub:type="noteref">90</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lads collected, and the <i xml:lang="pl">lisice</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renowned in Lithuanian songs; they are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Emblem of maidenhood, for never grubs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devour them; and more wondrous, never insects</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon them sit. The youthful ladies seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slim <i xml:lang="pl">borowik</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref-92" epub:type="noteref">92</a> which the song extols,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref-93" epub:type="noteref">93</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>As colonel of the fungi. But all search</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For agarics; which, humbler in their growth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And less renowned in songs, yet most delicious</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are, whether they be eaten fresh, or salted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In autumn or in winter. But the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Collected <i xml:lang="pl">muchomory</i>.</span>
					<span>Others form</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The commonwealth of mushrooms, in the mass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despised for harmfulness, or evil taste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet they have their uses; food for beasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And insects’ nests, and ornaments of groves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the green table-cloth of meadows, like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A row of table vessels they appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silvery <i xml:lang="pl">surojadki</i>, red and yellow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appear like tiny goblets filled with wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <i xml:lang="pl">kozlak</i> like a swelling cup reversed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="pl">Lejki</i> like slender glasses of champagne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="pl">Bielaki</i>, round and white, and broad and flat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Dresden cups filled to the brim with milk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a round ball, filled with a blackish dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="pl">Purchawka</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref-94" epub:type="noteref">94</a> like a pepper-castor; other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Names are there, known in tongue of wolves or hares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By men unchristened;⁠—but they have no number,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no one condescends to touch the hare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wolfish mushrooms; and whoever stoops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards them, and perceiveth his mistake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In anger breaks the fungus, or upon it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tramples, and spoiling thus the grass, he acts</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Very imprudently.</span>
					<span>But Telimena</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Collected neither human mushrooms nor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wolfish; she, absent-minded, weary, looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around her, with her head uplifted. Angry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Regent said that she was seeking mushrooms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the trees; the Assessor likened her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With greater malice, to a hen-bird, seeking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around to find a place to build her nest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>However, it appeared she sought for silence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For solitude; for slowly she withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself from her companions; and she went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the wood, towards a low-sloped hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ershadowed, for the trees grew thickly there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A grey stone midmost; from beneath the stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A streamlet murmured, gushed forth, and at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though it sought for shadow, hid itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the herbage thick and growing high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, drunk with water, round luxuriated.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the swift, wilful stream in grasses swaddled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid on bed of leafage, motionless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And noiseless, unperceived, and scarcely heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did whisper to itself, like crying child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When laid down in its cradle, while the mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above it curtains binds of foliage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scatters leaves of poppy on its head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tranquil, lovely place; here Telimena</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft hides herself, and calls it Sanctuary</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of Meditation.</span>
					<span>Standing by the brook,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She from her shoulders threw upon the grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her lightly-waving shawl, like bloodstone red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a swimmer, who doth bend her down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the chilly water, ere she dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plunge, so she knelt down, and gradually</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent to one side. At last, as borne away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a coral torrent, on the shawl she fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay extended; on the grass her elbow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaning her brow upon her open hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her head bent downward to the ground, and on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ground beside her head there gleamed the white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vellum paper of a French book. Over</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The alabaster pages, wreathed the black</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Ringlets and rosy ribbons.</span>
					<span>In the emerald</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the luxuriant grass upon the shawl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bloodstone-red, in a long garment, as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within a coral covering, wherefrom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her locks appeared at one end, at the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was a black slipper; at the sides gleamed white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her snowy stocking, handkerchief, and whiteness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hands and face; she well might seem afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A many-coloured caterpillar, crawling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the green leaf of a maple-tree.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alas! the charms and beauties of this picture</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain sought connoisseurs; none heeded them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All were so busy with their mushroom hunt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However, Thaddeus regarded them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glanced aside, and daring not to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway, he glided sidewards to the place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As does the hunter, in a leafy booth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Movable, planted on two wheels, when he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follows the trail of game; or in pursuing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plovers, upon the saddle lays his gun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or underneath the horse’s neck; now seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drag a harrow, now along the ridge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ride; but every move draws nearer to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spot where sit the birds. So Thaddeus</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Stole up.</span>
					<span>The Judge disturbed his ambush, and</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cutting across his way, made haste unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fountain. With his <i xml:lang="pl">sarafan’s</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref-95" epub:type="noteref">95</a> white skirt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a great handkerchief, the end of which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was bound unto his girdle, played the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A straw hat, bound beneath his chin, from his</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift movement, like a leaf of burdock, in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind waved to and fro; now on his shoulder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It fell, and now again upon his eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A great stick in his hand: thus strode the Judge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stopped, and in the streamlet washed his hands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then on the great stone close by Telimena</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat, and both hands on the ivory head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his enormous cane supporting, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Began with such preamble.</span>
					<span>“As thou seest,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since Thaddeus came here as guest, I have had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No small anxiety. I am an old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And childless man; he is a good boy, truly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My only consolation in the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And future heir unto my fortune. I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By heaven’s grace, shall leave no bad provision</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of noble’s bread behind me; ’tis now time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His future to consider, and his settling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But judge of my distress. Thou knowest well</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Pan Jacek</span>, my own brother, and the father</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thaddeus⁠—a man most singular,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis hard to know the meaning of his plans⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not return unto his native land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven only knows where he has hid himself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will not even tell his son he lives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But is continually disposing of him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He first desired to send him to the legions;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And greatly this tormented me. Then he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agreed that he should stay at home and marry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He should indeed have got a wife already.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I looked for a good match. No dweller here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In birth is equal, or in parentage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the Chamberlain; his daughter Anna</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is marriageable, beautiful, well-dowered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wished to”⁠—Telimena here grew pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid down her book, half rose, again sat down.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“As I my mother love,” said she, “are you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My brother, in your senses, right in heart?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think you that you will be a benefactor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thaddeus, if, being yet a lad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You make of him a buckwheat sower? You</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Debar him from the world. Believe me, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some time will curse you for it. Such a talent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rooms to bury, and in garden ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believe me, in so far as I have seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is a boy of some intelligence;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is worth while for him to get some polish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the great world. You would do well, my brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To send him to some capital, for instance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Warsaw. Or, do you know what I think?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ’twere to Petersburg? This winter I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall probably be going there on business.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us together settle what to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Thaddeus. I know many people there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have influence; it is the surest way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By my assistance he will find an entrance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the best families, and being known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To persons of importance, he will get</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An office, or an order; let him then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave, if he will, the service, and come home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having already some importance, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some knowledge of the world. What think you, brother?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ay, in one’s early years,” the Judge replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It is not wrong a boy should air himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little, and look round him in the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rub a little among folk. Myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When young, o’er not a little of the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I travelled, went to <span xml:lang="pl">Piotrkow</span> and to Dubno;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now as a pleader with the tribunal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Promoting now my own affairs, I went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As far as Warsaw. As a man, not little</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I profited thereby. I should desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To send my nephew also among people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But simply as a traveller, like to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A journeyman, who ends his term of years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To get a little knowledge of the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not for rank or order. With respect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Russian rank or order⁠—how should that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confer importance? Of our ancient lords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, even of the new ones, who among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The somewhat higher nobles of the district,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cares for such trifles? Yet, however, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are in esteem with mankind, for in them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They honour family and a good name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or office, but a native one, conferred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By citizen’s election, not by any</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Favour whatever.”</span>
					<span>Telimena here</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke in: “If thus you think, so much the better,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My brother; send him out then as a traveller.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou seest, sister,” sadly spoke the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scratching his head; “I should desire it much.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what avails this, with new hindrances?</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Pan Jacek</span> will not from his own control</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Release his son, and has just sent to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bernardine, this Robak, who is come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that side Vistula; my brother’s friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is he, and cognisant of all his thoughts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they between them have already settled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The destiny of Thaddeus, and desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he shall marry⁠—that he wed Sophia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your ward. The two will have, besides my fortune,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A capital as dowry by the favour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>; for you know the capital</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is his, and by his favour I enjoy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its interest nearly all. He therefore has</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The right of disposition. You consider</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How this result, with the least trouble, may</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be brought about. They must become acquainted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis true, they are very young, especially</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia; but this need be no obstacle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it is time to bring Sophia out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her seclusion, for indeed she now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Is growing out of childhood.”</span>
					<span>Telimena,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Astonished and half-frightened, half arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knelt upon the shawl; at first she heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attentive; then with motion of her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protested; with impatient movement shaking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her hand above her ear, as though to chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like insects the displeasing words away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Back to the speaker’s lips.</span>
					<span>“Ah! ah! this is</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new thing! Let it injure Thaddeus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or injure not, yourself can judge the best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thaddeus to me is nothing; you yourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispose of him; make him an overseer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or put him in a tavern; let him sell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Liquor, or carry game home from the forest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With him do what shall please you. But Sophia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is Sophia to you? I shall dispose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her in marriage, I alone! Because</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Pan Jacek</span> gave some money to bring up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia, and a little yearly pension</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assigns to her, and deigns to promise more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still for all that he has not purchased her!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for the rest, you gentlemen both know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the world knows well, your liberal gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To us are not bestowed without a reason.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For something the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span> owe unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The race of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span>.” To this portion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her discourse, with scarcely understood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trouble, and grief, and horror visible,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge attended, and as though he feared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest of the discourse, he bowed his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, with his hand assenting, deeply blushed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Telimena finished speaking thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have been her guardian, am a relative,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia’s one protector. I alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall think about her happiness.”⁠—“But if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She find her happiness in this same marriage?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge said, raising up his glance; “suppose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she likes Thaddeus?”⁠—“Like him, that’s a pear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a willow;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref-96" epub:type="noteref">96</a> like or not like; ’tis</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A weighty thing to me; Sophia will not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be richly dowered, in truth; but then she is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not of a petty village, or a mean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobility. She comes of the Illustrious</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most Powerful, she is a <span xml:lang="pl">Wojewode</span>’s daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born from a <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkowna</span>; she will get</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A husband⁠—we have taken so much pains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About her education⁠—only if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She have not here run wild.” The Judge with heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listened, and looked into her eyes; he seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeased, for pretty cheerfully he answered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well then, what must we do? Heaven knows that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sincerely wished to get the business done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only without anger. If you do not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agree, you are right; ’tis sad, but ’tis unfitting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Angry to be. I counselled this, because</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My brother ordered it; there’s no compulsion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you refuse still Master Thaddeus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will write back to <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>, that ’tis not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fault his son’s betrothal to Sophia</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does not take place. Now will I counsel take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With myself only. Possibly I shall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begin arrangements<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a> with the Chamberlain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the rest we will decide upon.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile had Telimena cooler grown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I refuse nothing, brother dear,” she said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But gently! you yourself have said it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As yet too early; they are both too young.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us look round, and wait; nought hinders that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make the young people known to one another.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We will consider well, we cannot risk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The happiness of others thus on chance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I only warn betimes; do not, my brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over-persuade now Thaddeus, nor compel him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love Sophia; for the heart is not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A servant, neither owns a master’s reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor can be bound by violence in a chain!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref-98" epub:type="noteref">98</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereon the Judge, uprising, full of thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Departed. Master Thaddeus drew near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the opposing side, pretending that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The search for mushrooms drew him to the spot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the same direction came the Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Now slowly forward.</span>
					<span>Hidden by the trees,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Telimena and the Judge disputed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count had stood, much wondering at this scene.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length he drew out from his pocket paper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pencil, implements he always carried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along with him; and spreading out the paper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over a tree-trunk bending, sketched the picture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying unto himself: “As though they were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus grouped on purpose; he upon the stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She on the grass; a group most picturesque!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Characteristic heads, the contrast marked.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came up, stopped, and put his eyeglass on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rubbed the lenses, and looked more and more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Will this miraculous, this lovely sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perish, or be transformed if I approach?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This velvet grass be only beet and poppies?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in this nymph shall I but recognise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Some housekeeper?”</span>
					<span>Although the Count had often</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seen Telimena in the Judge’s house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where pretty often he had been, he little</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had her esteemed; and most astonished was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find in her the model of his picture.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beauty of the place, and her position,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charming, tasteful dress had so transformed her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She scarcely might be recognised. There yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone unextinguished anger in her eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her face, enlivened by the wind’s fresh breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discussion with the Judge, and by the sudden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrival of the young men, deeply blushed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>More deeply than her wont.</span>
					<span>“Madam,” the Count</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said, “Deign my boldness to forgive. I come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once to ask your pardon and to thank you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pardon, for that I tracked your steps by stealth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thank you that I have been witness of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your meditation. Much as I offended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much am I your debtor. Interrupting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An hour of meditation, unto you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I owe an hour of inspiration, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blessèd moment. Be the man condemned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lover of the arts awaits your pardon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much I have ventured; I will venture more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Judge.” And he knelt, and offered her his landscape.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Telimena gave, in courteous strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her judgment on the attempt, but spoke as one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who understood the art; of praises sparing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sparing not encouragement. “Bravo!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She said; “I compliment you; not a little</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of talent. Only this forget not; most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis needful to seek out the fairest nature.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O happy skies of Italy! the Caesars’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gardens of roses! classic waterfalls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tivoli! and fearful rocky tunnels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Posilipo! There, Count, is the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of painters. But in ours the Muses’ child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put out to nurse in <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>, must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Die certainly. I’ll frame that picture, Count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or place it in my album, with a number</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of drawings, which I have from everywhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Collected; I have many in my bureau.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So they began to talk of those blue heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmurs of seas, and sweet winds, rocky heights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commingling here and there as travellers wont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughter and railing at their native land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet round them the Litvanian forests stretched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So full of beauty and of dignity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cherry-tree with garland of wild hops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woven around it, and the service-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh-blushing like a shepherdess; the hazel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like maenad, with green thyrsis, decked about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As by a garland, with its pearly nuts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lower grew the forest children; blackthorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the embraces of the briony;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aspen, whose black lips pressed the raspberries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trees and bushes joined their leaves like hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like youths and maidens standing for the dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In circle of the married pairs. There stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One couple, raised o’er all the forest crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By slenderness of shape, and charm of colour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white birch, bride-like, with her spouse the hornbeam;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And further, like old people looking on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their children and grandchildren, silent sitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here reverend beech-trees; there the matron poplars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oak with mosses bearded, with the weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of five long ages on his humpy back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaning, as though on columns of a grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On fossil trunks of oaks, his forefathers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thaddeus was restless, not a little tired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this long conversation, in which he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could take no share. But soon as they began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To celebrate the woods of foreign lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And count in turn all species of their trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The orange, cypress, olive, almond-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cactus, and aloe, and mahogany,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sandal and citron, ivy, walnut, figs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exalting all their forms, and shapes, and stalks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More restless still was Thaddeus, and at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer could restrain himself from rage.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Simple he was, but strongly could he feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charms of nature; on his native forest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking, he spoke with inspiration full:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have seen those celebrated trees at Wilna,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the botanic garden, those that grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the east, and south, and in that beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Italian land. But which of them can be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compared with our trees? Can the aloe, with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long rods, like a conductor? or the citron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dwarf with golden balls, with lacquered leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A short and dumpy thing, like a short woman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ugly, but rich? or can that much-praised cypress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long, thin, and lean? It does not seem the tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sadness, but of weariness. They say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it looks very sad upon a grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis like a German lackey in court mourning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dares not lift his hands, or turn his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest he should sin against court etiquette.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Is not our honest birch-tree fairer far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like peasant-woman weeping for her son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or widow for her husband; wringing hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the long streams of her dishevelled hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall o’er her shoulders down unto the ground?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mute with her sorrow, yet how speakingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her form seems sobbing. Wherefore then, Sir Count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you love painting, paint you not our trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among which you are sitting? In plain truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The neighbours will make jest of you, that while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You live upon the fertile Litvin plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You only paint some sort of rocks and deserts.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My friend,” the Count replied; “fair nature is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The form, the background, the material part;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But inspiration is the soul, which, borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the wings of the imagination,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By taste is polished, and by rules supported.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature is not sufficient, nor sufficient</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enthusiasm; the lover of the arts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must fly into the sphere of the ideal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all things beautiful are fit to paint.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this from books you’ll learn in your own time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to what touches painting; for a picture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are necessary points of view, and grouping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ensemble, and atmosphere; the atmosphere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Italy! And therefore in the art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of painting Italy is, was, and shall be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fatherland of painters. For this reason,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excepting Breughel, but not Van der Helle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref-99" epub:type="noteref">99</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The landscape painter, for there are two Breughels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ruisdael, where is there, in all the north,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A landscape-painter of the highest power?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sky, the sky is necessary.”⁠—“Our</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Painter <span xml:lang="pl">Orlowski</span>,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-100" id="noteref-100" epub:type="noteref">100</a> broke in Telimena,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Had the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span> taste. For you must know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it is the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas’</span> special sickness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except their native land that nothing please them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Orlowski</span>⁠—who his life in Petersburg</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spent a most famous painter; I have some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sketches of his in my bureau⁠—lived near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The emperor, at court, as though it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Paradise, but you would not believe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Count, how he for his country longed, and loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Continually to recall his youthful years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exalting all in Poland, earth, sky, forests!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And he was right!” cried Thaddeus with warmth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For that Italian sky of yours, so far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I have heard of it, so pure, so blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must be like standing water. Are not wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And storm a hundred times more beautiful?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With us it is enough to raise one’s head!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many sights, how many scenes and pictures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even in the very changing of the clouds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every cloud is different. For instance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The autumn cloud crawls like a lazy tortoise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy with rain, and from the sky to earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lets down long streamers, like dishevelled hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are floods of rain. A hail-cloud with the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flies swift like a balloon, round, darkly blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Midmost it shineth yellow; a great murmur</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is heard around. But even every day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look ye, these small white clouds, how changeable!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First like a flock of wild geese, or of swans,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from behind the wind like falcon drives them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together in a flock; they closer press,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They thicken, they grow larger⁠—newer wonders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have archèd necks, their manes fly loose, they put</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth rows of legs, and o’er the arch of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fly like a troop of wild steeds o’er the steppes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All white as silver; they have mingled; now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Masts spring up from their necks, and from their manes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad sails. The troop is changed into a ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That proudly sails on, silently and slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the plain of heaven’s blue expanse.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Count and Telimena looked on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thaddeus pointed with one hand the cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other pressing Telimena’s hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some moments passed by in this silent scene.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count spread out his paper on his hat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drew his pencil forth. Then to their ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tormenting, loud the bell resounded, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stilly wood at once was full of shouts</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And noise.</span>
					<span>The Count said in a solemn voice,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nodding his head, “Thus fate is used to end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All things on earth by ringing of a bell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The calculations of great minds, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imagination’s plans, and innocent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pastimes, and friendship’s pleasures; the outpouring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of tender hearts. When far off roars the bronze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All is confused, and broken off, and troubled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vanishes!” And here on Telimena</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Casting a tender glance, “What shall remain?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she replied to him, “Remembrance stays.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wishing somewhat to alleviate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sadness of the Count, she plucked, and gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him a blossom of forget-me-not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the Count kissed, and pinned unto his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thaddeus on his side, now open bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A green bush, seeing through it something white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winding towards him; ’twas a little hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White as a lily; this he seized, and kissed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And silently his lips upon it dwelt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a bee plunges in a lily’s cup.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his lips he felt a something cold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He found a key, and a white paper folded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In trumpet-shape; it was a little note.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seized and hid them in his pocket; what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The key should mean he knew not, but that white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paper would unto him explain the whole.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The bell kept ringing on, and as an echo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resounded from the deeps of the still woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand shouts and uproars. ’Twas the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of seeking and of calling, being token</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mushroom-hunt was ended. Not at all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sad noise, neither a funereal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to the Count it seemed; convivial rather.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This bell each noontide shouting from the garret,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invites both guests and servants unto dinner.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was in ancient, peopled courts the custom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the Judge’s house it so remained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So from the thicket came the assembly forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All carrying baskets, handkerchiefs, together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound at the ends, and all of mushrooms full.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the young ladies carried in one hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a folded fan, the widely spreading</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="pl">Borowik</i>; in the other, bound together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like field-flowers, <i xml:lang="pl">opienki</i>, <i xml:lang="pl">surojadki</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of various hues; a <i xml:lang="pl">muchomor</i> the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All empty-handed Telimena came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And following her the two young gentlemen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The guests in order came in, and around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood in a circle. Then the Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At table took the highest seat; this place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was his by right of dignity and years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In going there he to the ladies bowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old men, and the youths. Beside him stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The begging friar, beside the friar the Judge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bernardine in Latin spoke short grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then brandy to the men was given; all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forthwith were seated, and in silence ate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Litvin <i xml:lang="pl">cholodziec</i> with appetite.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They dined in greater silence than their wont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none would talk, despite the host’s inviting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The different parties who took interest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dispute about the dogs, were thinking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About to-morrow’s contest and the pledges;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Telimena, talking constantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thaddeus, was obliged to turn away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times unto the Count, and even glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times upon the Assessor. So the fowler</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazes upon the snare wherein he will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lure goldfinches, but looks at the same time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a bait for sparrows. Both the Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thaddeus, each contented with himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both happy, and both full of hope, were not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready to talk for that. The Count with pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked on the little flower, and Thaddeus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his pocket furtively, half doubting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That little key were lost. He seized and twisted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The paper round, which yet he had not read.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge kept pouring the Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both champagne and Hungarian wines; he served him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attentively, and pressed his knee, but had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No inclination to converse with him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas seen he felt some trouble inwardly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In silence still the plates and courses passed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length an unexpected guest broke in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the weary course of dining. ’Twas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forester, who rushing headlong in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not consider it was dinner-time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ran up to his master; from his action</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his demeanour it was plain that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore some important and unusual news.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eyes of all the assembly turned on him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, having taken breath a little, said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A bear, most gracious sir!” All knew the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beast from the <i xml:lang="pl">Matecznik</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref-101" epub:type="noteref">101</a> had come out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And was endeavouring to steal past into</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forest land beyond the Niemen. He</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must speedily be followed up. This all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once acknowledged, though they neither did</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consult together, nor consider it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their broken words made visible the thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Common to all; their lively gestures, countless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commands, that going forth tumultuously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once from lips so many, hastened yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>All to one common aim.</span>
					<span>“Send to the village!”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge exclaimed; “to horse! the <i xml:lang="pl">setnik</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref-102" epub:type="noteref">102</a> call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow is the beating, but we want</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some volunteers. Who comes forth with a spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him two days of road-work be excused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And five days of forced labour.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-103" id="noteref-103" epub:type="noteref">103</a> “Quick!” exclaimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain; “and saddle the grey horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gallop to my house; bring those two bulldogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renowned throughout the neighbourhood; the male</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is <span xml:lang="pl">Sprawnik</span> called, the female is <span xml:lang="pl">Strapczyna</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-104" id="noteref-104" epub:type="noteref">104</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muzzle their jaws, and tie them in a bag.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring them on horseback here for greater haste.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“<span xml:lang="pl">Wanka</span>!” the Assessor cried unto a lad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Russian, “pass my <span xml:lang="pl">Sanguszkowa</span> cutlass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the grindstone; thou dost know that cutlass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had as present from the prince; look well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the belt, that each charge have a ball.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rifles!” cried all; “have them in readiness.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Assessor kept on shouting, “Lead! lead! lead!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have a mould for bullets in my pouch.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let notice to the parish priest be given,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Added the Judge, “that he to-morrow morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall say mass in the chapel by the forest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hunters a short offertory be it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span><abbr>St.</abbr> Hubert’s customary mass.”</span>
					<span>When given</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These orders, silence followed; every one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell deep in thought, and cast his eyes around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though he sought for some one; gradually</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All eyes the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s venerable face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draws to itself, and all unanimous.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was a sign that they a leader sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To head the coming expedition; they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> did confide the staff.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> rose, he understood their will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And striking solemnly upon the board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He from his bosom drew a great gold chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon a heavy watch hung like a pear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To-morrow,” said he, “half-past four, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forest chapel meet the brother hunters</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The force of beaters.”</span>
					<span>Thus he spoke, and left</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The table; after him the forester;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both must think over and direct the hunt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like generals, when battle is ordained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the morrow, while throughout the camps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soldiers clean their arms, and ride about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sleep on cloaks and saddles, void of care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in their silent tents the generals</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Awake and meditate.</span>
					<span>They broke off dinner,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that day in shoeing horses past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feeding dogs, gathering and cleaning arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At supper hardly any came to table.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even the partisans of Kusy and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Sokol ceased to-day to agitate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great dispute. The Regent and Assessor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went, arm in arm, a-seeking out the lead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The others with their labours wearied out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to sleep early to awake at dawn.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
