<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book VII: Council</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Council</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The sound and salutary counsels of Bartek, called the Prussian⁠—The soldierly appeal of Matthew the Baptist⁠—The politic opinion of Buchman⁠—<span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span> counsels a reconciliation, which is severed by the Penknife⁠—The speech of Gervasy, wherein are exhibited the great effects of Diet eloquence⁠—Protestation of old Matthew⁠—The sudden arrival of warlike reinforcements breaks off Council⁠—“Down with <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>!”</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>In order due their Envoy Bartek now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commenced his speech. He, as he often went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On rafts unto the kingdom, had been named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Prussian by his fellow-countrymen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In jest, for greatly did he hate the Prussians,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although he loved to talk of them. A man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advanced in years, in his far journeys he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had seen much of the world, a constant reader</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the gazettes, well-versed in politics;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Matthew’s absence he was usually</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The president of council.</span>
					<span>“This is not⁠—</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Matthias, my brother, and good father</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all of us⁠—this is no empty promise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d count upon the French in time of war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on four aces. ’Tis a warlike people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And since the days of Thaddeus <span xml:lang="pl">Kosciuszko</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world has ne’er seen such a martial genius</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the great emperor Bonaparte. I well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember when the Frenchmen crossed the Warta.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That time beyond the frontier I was staying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>During the year of eighteen hundred six.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was with Dantzig trading, but I have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Posen many relatives; I went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To visit them; and therefore with Pan Joseph</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grabowski, now commanding officer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who at that time in a village lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near <span xml:lang="pl">Objezierz</span>, I hunted some small game.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peace then was in Great Poland, as is now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Lithuania, but a sudden rumour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread all at once of a terrific battle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An envoy sent by Todwen came to us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grabowski read the letter through, and cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out, ‘Jena, Jena! The Prussians have been beaten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the head, the neck! A victory!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, lighting from my horse, fell on my knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thank the Lord. We rode into the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though on business, as we knew of nought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there we saw the Landrath, Hofraths, all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commissioners, and all such sons of dogs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They all bow low to us, each trembling, pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Prussian insects<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-184" id="noteref-184" epub:type="noteref">184</a> deluged with hot water.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rubbing our hands, and laughing, we entreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Humbly for news; we ask, ‘What news of Jena?’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-185" id="noteref-185" epub:type="noteref">185</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>They marvelled that already we should know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their defeat; the Germans cry: ‘<i xml:lang="de">Ach Gott!</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="de">O weh!</i>’ They went back home, and from their houses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They ran as fast as feet could carry them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh! what a scramble! all the roads were full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fugitives. The German folk like ants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crawled fast away, the carriages ran on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which there the folk call <i xml:lang="de">Wagen</i> and <i xml:lang="de">Fornalken</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men, women, carrying pipes and coffee-pots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dragging pillows, feather beds; they hurried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As best they might. But we in silence went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To council; hey! on horseback, to confound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retreating of the Germans! Now to smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Landraths on the necks, and flog the Hofraths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And catch the <i xml:lang="de">Herren Offiziere</i> by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their pigtails! But our General <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did enter Posen, and he brought the Emperor’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Command to insurrection! In one week</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our men so soundly had the Prussians thrashed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And driven them away, thou couldst not get</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A German, ev’n for medicine. Suppose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We also should thus nimbly turn about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with such speed, and here in Litva make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just such another bath for Muscovy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-186" id="noteref-186" epub:type="noteref">186</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ha! what dost thou think, Matthew? If the Russians</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contend with Bonaparte, it were no jest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight with him. He is the greatest warrior</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all the world, and he has countless armies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ha! what does Matthew think, our Father Rabbit?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ended. All await old Matthew’s sentence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matthew nor moved his head, nor raised his eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only many times he struck his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his side, as though he sought his sabre.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though since the land’s partition he had worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sabre, yet from ancient habit, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He heard the mention of the Muscovites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He moved his hand towards his left side aye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though to wield his Rod, and thence was he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called Zabok.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-187" id="noteref-187" epub:type="noteref">187</a> Now he lifted up his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They listen in deep silence. But Matthias</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deceived the general expectation, for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloud hung o’er his brow, and once again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head sank down upon his breast. At length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke, pronouncing slowly every word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With emphasis, and nodded to ’t in time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Silence!” he said; “whence cometh all this news?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How far off are the French? Who is their leader?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have they begun already war with Russia?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, and for what? And whence are they to march?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is their strength? What foot, and what of horse?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Who knoweth, let him speak!”</span>
					<span>Then silent all</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The assembly, gazing each on each. “I gladly,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Prussian said, “would wait the Bernardine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the news comes from him. Meantime we must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send to the frontier trusty spies, and arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The district all in secret; and meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conduct the whole thing prudently, so as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to betray our plans unto the Russians.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ha! wait? and bark? put off?” a second Matthew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke in, the Baptist christened, from a great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Club, which he called the Sprinkler. ’Twas with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day; he on its body leaned both hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the handle did support his chin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclaiming, “Wait! delay! hold <i xml:lang="pl">sejmiks</i>! Hem!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trem! brem! and then to fly! I have not been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Prussia; kingdom reason’s good for Prussia;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for me noble’s reason. This I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That whoso wants to fight, has but to grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Sprinkler; who will die, call in the priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus be quits! I want to live, to be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is the Bernardine? Are we then schoolboys?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’s Robak<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-188" id="noteref-188" epub:type="noteref">188</a> unto me? Let us be worms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on to gnaw at Muscovy! Trem! brem!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spies, scouts! Do you know, you there, what this means?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It means you’re old men, and incapable!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brothers! ’tis weasel’s work to ferret out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Bernardine’s to beg, but mine, to sprinkle!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sprinkle, and be quits!” And here he stroked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His club, and after him the crowd of nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouted full loudly, “Sprinkle, sprinkle, sprinkle!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Baptist’s side supported was by Bartek,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-189" id="noteref-189" epub:type="noteref">189</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surnamed the Razor, from his thin-edged sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Likewise by Matthew, who was named the Bucket,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a great rifle which he bore, with throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So wide that he from it, as from a pail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could pour a torrent of a dozen bullets.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both shouted, “Long live Baptist with the Sprinkler!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Prussian tried to speak; his words were drowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By tumult and by laughter; they exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Away! thou Prussian! coward! he who is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coward, let him hide himself beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A hood of Bernardine.”</span>
					<span>Old Matthew then</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly upraised his head, and then the noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to cease a little. “Mock not,” said he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“At Robak, ’tis a tough blade of a priest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That tiny worm has gnawed a bigger nut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than you. I saw him only once, he scarce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had cast a glance, I knew at once the game.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The priest did turn away his eyes, as fearing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should deign confess him. But all that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is no affair of mine; there’s much in this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To talk about. He never will come here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis vain to call the Bernardine to us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If all this news proceed from him, who knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With what intent? A devil of a priest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is! If nought you know beside such news,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why come you here, and what more do you wish?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“War!” cried they.⁠—“What war?” asked he. They replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“War with the Muscovites! To fight ’em! Hey!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down with the Muscovites!” The Prussian shouted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unceasingly, and ever raised his voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until he gained a hearing, part by bowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And partly by his thin and noisy speech.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I too desire to fight,” he cried, and smote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With both hands on his breast; “although I bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Sprinkler, with a barge-pole once I gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good christening to four Prussians at a time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who would have drowned me in the foamy Pregel.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You’re a bold fellow, Bartek!” Baptist cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Good! Sprinkle, sprinkle!”⁠—“But then, sweetest Jesus!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We first must know with whom to fight, and why;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must tell it to the world,” the Prussian cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For who will follow us? where shall they march?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, whither go, when we ourselves don’t know?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother nobility! ye noble sirs!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good gentlemen! we must have judgment, we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must order have and regularity!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye wish for war. Let us confederate;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-190" id="noteref-190" epub:type="noteref">190</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us consider how we shall unite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And underneath whose staff. So was it in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Poland; we the Germans saw retreat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What did we? We in secret did advise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We armed the nobles, and the peasant throng.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When ready, we did wait <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span>’s orders;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last! heyday! to horse! we rose at once.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I beg a hearing,” the Commissary<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-191" id="noteref-191" epub:type="noteref">191</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Klecko cried. A young man, handsome, dressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In German fashion. Buchman was he called.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet he was a Pole, in Poland born.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas not for certain known if he descended</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From nobles; but none asked concerning that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all respected Buchman, as he served</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A great lord, a good patriot was, and versed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In learning; he from foreign books had learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The art of husbandry, and with good order</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Performed the administration of the lands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From politics he sage conclusions drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By writings smooth and elegant could make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself renowned. And therefore all were still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he began to speak. “I beg a hearing,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repeated he, and coughed three times; he bowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus with sounding lips he clattered forth:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The previous speakers, in their eloquent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speeches, have touched on all the vital points,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chiefest; they have the discussion raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto a higher standard. Unto me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remains alone to blow unto one fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These scattered thoughts and reasonings. I have hopes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reconcile all contrary opinions.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two parts in the discussion have I marked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Division is already made; I go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By this division. First of all, for what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall we make insurrection? in what spirit?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the first and foremost vital question</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The second question doth concern itself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With revolutionary government.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this division is right excellent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only I fain would have it t’other way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First to begin with government. As soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As government I understand, therefrom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I may deduce its spirit and its aim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, as to government; as I glance o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The history of all humankind, what in it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Observe I? That the savage human race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattered in forests, herd together, bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Themselves together for their mutual</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defence; they this consider, and this is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first of councils. Each one then lays down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A portion of his proper liberty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For general good; and this is the first statute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whence, as from a fount, all legislation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth flow. We therefore see that government</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is by agreement framed, proceeding not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As some judge wrongly, from the will of God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But on a mutual contract government</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rather is supported, and division</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of powers is but a needful consequence.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There you have contracts! of Kiew or Minsk!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Matthew cried out; “truly Babin rule!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-192" id="noteref-192" epub:type="noteref">192</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pan Buchman, whether God sent us the Czar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ’twere the devil, I’ll not quarrel with you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only tell us how to oust the Czar.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ay! that’s the knotty point!” the Baptist cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If I might spring up to the throne, and with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Sprinkler plash and wet the Czar, no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By any contract would he aye return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Kiew, of Minsk, or any Buchman treaty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor could his priests by power divine restore him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor by the power of Belzebub. I call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him a bold fellow, who will sprinkle. Buchman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your speech, good sir, was very eloquent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But eloquence is froth and hum. To sprinkle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>That’s the chief thing.”</span>
					<span>“Just so, just so,” hissed forth,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rubbing both hands together, Bartek, named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Razor, from Matthew to the Baptist running,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like shuttle thrown from one side of a loom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across its length unto the further side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Only thou Matthew with the Rod, and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matthew with club, agree; by heaven! we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall smash the Muscovites to bits; the Awl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will go beneath the orders of the Rod.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Command is good,” said Baptist; “for parade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One order in the <span xml:lang="pl">Kowno</span> brigade we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had, short and pithy: Frighten, but yourselves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be not afraid! Fight, but surrender not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>March forward often, deal blows thickly round!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Whizz! whizz!’ ”</span>
					<span>“Yes, those the orders are for me,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replied the Awl; “why write an act? waste ink?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We must confederate? Why is all this coil?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Matthew be the Marshal, and the Rod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His staff.”⁠—“Long live,” cried Baptist, “Weathercock!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles answered, “Long the Sprinkler live!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But in the corners rose a murmur, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas stifled in the midst; ’twas seen the council</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was now divided in two parties. Buchman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said, “Never praise I unanimity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is my system.” Some one else exclaimed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I lay my veto down!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-193" id="noteref-193" epub:type="noteref">193</a> some from the corners</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Re-echoed him. At last a rough voice spoke:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobleman Skoluba late arrived.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What’s this here, you Dobrzynskis? what is doing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we, are we then outlaws? When we were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invited hither from our settlement,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik Rembajlo Mopanku</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They told us that some great things should be done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not only the Dobrzynski family,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the whole district, whole nobility,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therein should be concerned, and Robak talked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a like manner, though he never finished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And indistinctly spoke, and darkly he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Explained himself. At last, the end of ends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We rode here, and by couriers summoned all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our neighbours. And you are not here alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Masters Dobrzynski. We are full two hundred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From various other farmsteads of us here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So let us all take counsel. If a Marshal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be needed, let us all proclaim him, be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ballot equal. Live equality!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Two <span xml:lang="pl">Terajewicze</span> then, four <span xml:lang="pl">Stypulkowscy</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three <span xml:lang="pl">Mickiewicze</span> cried aloud, “Long live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Equality!” Skoluba’s side upholding;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Buchman meanwhile, “Unanimity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were ruin!”⁠—And the Baptist said, “We’ll do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without your help. Long live our Marshal, Matthew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Matthews! Hey! unto the staff!” Loud shouted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the Dobrzynskis, “We entreat you!” but</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stranger nobles, “We permit it not!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-194" id="noteref-194" epub:type="noteref">194</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in two parties was the crowd divided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each nodding in defiance to the rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One crying, “We permit it not!” the others,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“We do entreat you!”</span>
					<span>But old Matthew still</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone unmoving, in the centre sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sole head immovable was his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There opposite to him the Baptist stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With both hands leaning on his club; but round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head he kept turning, leaning on its top,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a gourd fixed on a lofty pole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forward now, now back, alternately</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He nodded, and unceasing “Sprinkle, sprinkle!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclaimed. Along the room unquiet Razor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran from the Baptist unto Matthew’s bench.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bucket slowly passed across the room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the Dobrzynskis to the noblemen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though he would unite them. One cried out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unceasing, “Shave!” the other, “Deluge ’em.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matthew was silent, but ’twas plainly seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>That he was angry.</span>
					<span>And this uproar raged</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A quarter of an hour, when from amid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heads of all the shouting crowd upsprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shining column high. It was a rapier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fathom long, a whole span broad, and sharp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either side; it was a Teuton sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of steel of Nuremberg. All silence kept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing upon the sword; who carried it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They knew not, but immediately they guessed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Penknife!” they exclaimed; “long live the Penknife!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail to the Penknife! jewel of <span xml:lang="pl">Rembajlo</span>!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail to <span xml:lang="pl">Rembajlo</span>, Notchy-pate, Half-goat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Mopanku!”</span>
					<span>Soon Gervasy (for ’twas he)</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pressed through the crowd into the chamber’s midst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made the Penknife’s blade to flash around;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lowering the point in sign of a salute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Matthew said: “The Penknife bows unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Rod. My brothers, nobles of Dobrzynski!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I come not here to counsel you in aught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll only tell you why I brought you here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what to do, how do’t, yourselves decide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye know that long a rumour goeth round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles’ farmsteads, that great things shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Done in the world. Friar Robak spoke of this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye all know?”⁠—“Ay! we know!” they cried. “Good, good.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ‘Unto the wise,’ ” pursued the orator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With penetrating glance, “ ‘two words suffice.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-195" id="noteref-195" epub:type="noteref">195</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is this not true?”⁠—“Ay, true indeed,” they said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“When the French Emperor,” the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> spoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall march from there, the Russian Czar from there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War follows ’twixt the Czar and Emperor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kings fall to loggerheads with kings, as is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The custom among monarchs. And shall we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit still? When great folks other great men throttle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us the lesser strangle, each his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From high to low, the great the great, the small</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The small; as soon as we begin to strike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down falls the whole confederacy of knaves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus flourish happiness and the Republic.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not this true?”⁠—“ ’Tis true,” they said, “as though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He read it from a book.”⁠—“True,” did repeat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Baptist; “sprinkle, sprinkle, and be quits!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’m ready aye to shave,” the Razor cried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do but agree,” the Bucket courteously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entreated, “under whose command to go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baptist and Matthew!” Buchman interrupted:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let fools agree. Discussions never hurt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The public cause. I beg you to be still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let’s listen, for the cause hereby will gain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> from a new point will discuss it.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rather,” the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> said, “from my great age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis meet for me to think of weighty things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do that there’s an emperor, there will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A king, a senate, deputies. Such things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mopanku, are in Krakow done, or Warsaw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not among us here in Dobrzyn. Not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On chimneys with a piece of chalk are written</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confederation Acts, nor in a barge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On parchment are they written. Not for us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To write an act, for Poland has alike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crown and Litvanian Writers; our forefathers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proceeded thus. My business is to slay with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Penknife.”⁠—“Mine to splash with Sprinkler,” said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Baptist.⁠—“And to pierce through with the Awl,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried Bartek of the Awl, his slender sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Producing.</span>
					<span>“All of us,” the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I take as witnesses. For did not Robak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say that before you in your house receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Napoleon, you must sweep the dirt away?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye all heard that. Do ye all understand?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who traitorously slew the best of Poles?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who robbed him, plundered, yet would wrest away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The remnant from the true inheritor?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is he? Must I tell you?”⁠—“ ’Tis <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The villain!” broke in Bucket.⁠—“Fie! the tyrant!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hissed Razor forth. “Then sprinkle him!” said Baptist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If he’s a traitor,” Buchman said, “then to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallows!”⁠—“Down!” cried all, “down with <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But here the Prussian dared to undertake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defending of the Judge, and to the nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cried, with lifted arms: “My brothers! no!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! no! by God’s wounds! What is this new thing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, are you mad? Were we then speaking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this? Because a man at one time had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mad and outlaw brother, shall we then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chastise him for his brother? That were Christian!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is some plotting of the Count’s in this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To say the Judge was hard upon the nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is falsehood! Heaven forbid that it were truth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is yourselves would summon him to law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he seeks concord with you. Freely he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth yield his own; he pays the mark beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has a suit against the Count⁠—what then?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They both are rich; let lord contend with lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’s that to us? The Judge a tyrant! He</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did first forbid the peasant to bow down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To earth before him, saying that was sin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not seldom at his house a company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of peasants (I myself have seen) sit down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With him at table. For his peasantry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He pays the taxes, and it is not so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Klecko, though you rule there, Master Buchman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In German fashion. What! the Judge a traitor!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have known each other from the lowest form.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good was he as a child, and now the same.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loveth Poland more than all things. He</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keeps Polish customs, and no entrance gives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Russian fashions. Oft as I return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Prussia, wishing to wash off the German,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go to <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>, as the centrum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Polish manners; there one may drink in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And breathe one’s country. Heaven forbid! Dobrzynskis!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am your brother, but I will not let</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge be wronged, and this shall come to nought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not, brothers, in Great Poland so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What spirit and what concord! dear to mem’ry!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None there with such a trifle dared to mar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Our council.”</span>
					<span>“ ’Tis no trifle,” said the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“To hang up rascals!”</span>
					<span>Louder grew the murmur.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span> begged a hearing; on a bench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sprang, he stood, and raised above their heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beard like tavern-bush, that hung far down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his girdle. With his right hand he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did slowly doff his cap of foxes’ skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his left composed again his gown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disordered; then his left hand he replaced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his girdle, and thus made discourse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fox-skin <i xml:lang="pl">kolpak</i> bowing all round:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now, sirs Dobrzynski! I’m a Jew myself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge to me is neither kith nor kin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I honour the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span> as right good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Masters, and as my landlords; I respect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the Dobrzynskis likewise, all the Barteks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Matthews, all as neighbours very good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And benefactors. But I tell you this:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you do any violence to the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis very wrong. Maybe you’ll conquer, kill⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the Assessors, and the <span xml:lang="pl">Sprawnik</span>?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-196" id="noteref-196" epub:type="noteref">196</a> Prison.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span> village is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A band of soldiers, <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-197" id="noteref-197" epub:type="noteref">197</a> all. The Assessor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in the house, and if he only whistle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’ll muster there, and come as though on purpose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what will be? If for the French you wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The French are still far off; the way is long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am a Jew; I nothing know of war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I was in <span xml:lang="pl">Bielica</span>, where I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jews from the very frontier; and they say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Frenchmen stand on the Lososna river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if there’s war, ’twill not be till the spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, thus I say; wait yet a little time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span> house is not a booth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That one can take down, put into a wagon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drive away; the mansion as it stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will stand until the spring. The Judge is not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Jew upon a lease; he will not fly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll find him there next spring. And now, go home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And do not talk aloud of what has been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For talking is in vain. And if it please</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble gentlemen, I beg you come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With me. My Sarah has a little <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will treat all to-day, and have great music.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll order bagpipes, bass-viol, two fiddles⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Master Matthew loves old July mead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a new mazurka; I have new mazurkas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I have taught my boys to sing right well.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The generally belovèd <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span>’s speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to their hearts; a cry arose, a shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of joy, a murmur of consent went round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind the very house⁠—when with the Penknife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy pointed unto <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Jew sprang down, he vanished in the crowd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> cried, “Away, Jew! never thrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy fingers between doors; this thee concerns not!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because you trade, Sir Prussian, with a pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of miserable barges, that belong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the Judge, you strain your throat for him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have you forgotten then, Mopanku, how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your father floated down to Prussia twenty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Barges belonging to <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>, whereby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He did enrich himself and family?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even all of you, who are in Dobrzyn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You old men may remember, you, young men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have heard, the Pantler was to all of you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A father and a benefactor. Whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent he commissioner to his Pinsk estates?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas a Dobrzynski. Who were his accountants?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dobrzynskis. And his stewardship, finances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To none except Dobrzynskis did he trust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your interests he promoted in the courts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He got you bread of favour from the king;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sent your children, at his own expense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To school to the <span xml:lang="pl">Pijary</span> fathers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-198" id="noteref-198" epub:type="noteref">198</a> paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their board and clothing, and at his expense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advanced them when grown-up. Why did he this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because he was your neighbour. And to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>’s borders touch upon your frontier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When did he ever aught of good to you?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nothing whatever,” Bucket now broke in;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For from a petty noble he grew up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how he puffs himself with pride, faugh! faugh!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How lifts he up his nose! Do you remember?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I asked him to my daughter’s wedding. I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was drinking; but he would not drink. Says he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I cannot drink like all you noblemen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You nobles drink like fishes.’ There’s a magnate!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A delicate dish of flour of Marymont!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-199" id="noteref-199" epub:type="noteref">199</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drank not; down his throat we poured the wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cried, ‘You wrong me!’ Well then, wait a bit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from my Bucket I will deluge thee!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The wretch!” cried Baptist; “oh! I’ll sprinkle him!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My son, he was a prudent boy, but now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is grown so stupid that they call him Bustard.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-200" id="noteref-200" epub:type="noteref">200</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge is cause that he is such a fool.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I said, ‘Why creepest thou to <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If there I catch thee may the Lord defend thee!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again he went to see Sophia, lying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wait among the hemp. I caught him, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I laid about his ears at once; he bleated</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whimpered, as he were a little boy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Father, although you kill me, I must go.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he kept whimpering. ‘What is the matter?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he told me that he loved Sophia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wished to look upon her. I was sorry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the poor fellow; so unto the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I said, ‘Judge, give Sophia to the Bustard.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, ‘She’s young as yet; wait three years more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See what she wish herself.’ The wretch! he lied!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s now betrothing her to somebody.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve heard so. I will creep in at the wedding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with my Sprinkler sanctify their couch.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And shall such villain,” said the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, “be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ruler? shall he ruin ancient lords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His betters? shall he make to perish both</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>’s name and race? Where in the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is gratitude? It is not here in Dobrzyn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brothers, you wish to fight the Russian Czar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fear to fight the house of <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are afraid of prison. Should I counsel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You unto murder? Heaven forbid it! Nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brothers, by the law I take my stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count in very truth has gained the suit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has gained already not a few decrees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It but remains to put in execution!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So was it formerly. The tribunal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrote a decree, the nobles would enforce it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most chiefly the Dobrzynskis; and your glory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus grew in Litva. You yourselves, Dobrzynskis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Mysk foray fought against the Russians,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led by <span xml:lang="pl">Wojsilowicz</span>, the Russian general,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by a villain who was friend to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wolk of <span xml:lang="pl">Logomowicze</span>. You remember,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How we made Wolk our prisoner; how we wished</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hang him on a beam, inside a barn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because he was a tyrant to the peasants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well as servant to the Muscovites.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as those foolish peasants pitied him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had to spit him elsewhere on my Penknife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not here recall you other raids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without a number, whence you always came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With booty and applause, as suiteth nobles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why speak of this? To-day the Count in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your neighbour, urges suit, procures decrees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none of you will the poor orphan help,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heir of that Pantler, who so many fed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No friend now has he; only me, the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this most faithful Penknife here of mine.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Sprinkler also,” said the Baptist. “Where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art, Gervasy, there will I be too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while I have a hand, and it can plash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plash in my hand! For two are two! By heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy mine, thou hast a sword, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Sprinkler, and I’ll sprinkle well, and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shalt hew them down. And so whizz! whizz! plash! plash!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And let them talk!”</span>
					<span>“And here is Bartek too,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Razor said; “my brothers won’t reject me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when you lather, I will shave away.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And I,” the Bucket said, “will march with you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if we cannot make the rest agree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the choice of Marshal, what are votes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And balls to me? Another sort of ball</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For me.” Here from his pouch he drew a handful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bullets, and he clinked them in his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here are the balls,” he cried; “into the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the balls!”⁠—“With you!” Skoluba cried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We’ll join with you; wherever you are, we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall also be! Long live the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span>! live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Half-goats! Long the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> live, <span xml:lang="pl">Rembajlo</span>!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Down with <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>!”</span>
					<span>Thus the eloquent</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy drew all hearts along with him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For each one had some grievance ’gainst the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As usual is with neighbours. One complained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of damage, one about a clearing, one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About infringement of a boundary;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest were moved by envy of his wealth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hatred did unite them all; they pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, lifting up on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Their clubs and sabres.</span>
					<span>Matthew, hitherto</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gloomy, immovable, now from the bench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose, and strode into the chamber’s midst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And planted firm his hands upon his sides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looking straight before him shook his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He raised his voice, and slowly every word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pronounced, with emphasis and weight: “Ye fools!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye fools! And fools ye are! Who cometh to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mill may grind upon you! So then, while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The council talked of Poland’s resurrection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The common weal, ye fools! there were disputes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among ye! Ye could not, ye fools! discourse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together, nor in order, or appoint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A leader over you, ye fools! But let</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One urge your private grievances, ye fools!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then is there concord ’mid you! Get you gone!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as I Matthew am, by many millions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hundred of many thousands, cartloads, tons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Wagons, casks full of devils!!!⁠—”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-201" id="noteref-201" epub:type="noteref">201</a></span>
					<span>All were silent,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As struck by thunder, till a fearful cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose behind the house, “Long live the Count!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He entered, riding in the Matthews’ farm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself well armed; ten armèd jockeys followed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count was mounted on a gallant steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clad all in black; a wide cloak over all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nut-brown, of cut Italian, without sleeves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a great veil, and fastened by a clasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the neck, did o’er his shoulders fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wore a broad hat with a feather, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bore a sword. Round turning, with the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The assembly he saluted.</span>
					<span>“Live the Count!”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cried; “with him we’ll live and die.” The nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peeped from the cottage windows, following</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, pressing nearer to the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> went out, and the crowd rushed forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind him through the doors. Matthias drove out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The others, closed the door, and drew the bolt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But looking from the window once again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Said, “Fools!”</span>
					<span>Meanwhile the nobles flocked around</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count, and went into the tavern. Now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy recollected former times.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three girdles from their garments he commands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They bring him; by them from the tavern vault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He dragged three casks; the one containing mead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other <i xml:lang="pl">wódka</i>, and the third held beer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew the bung out; with a murmur spurted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three streams forth; one like silver white, the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red as a bloodstone, yellow was the third.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They in a threefold rainbow play on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a thousand barrels falling, hum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within a hundred glasses. Loudly shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noblemen; some drink, some wish the Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred years; all cry “Down with <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In silence <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span> meanwhile had escaped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a bare-backed steed. The Prussian, likewise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unheard, though still he eloquently spoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tried to escape; the nobles him pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crying, he was a traitor. Far apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Mickiewicz</span> stood, nor shouted, nor advised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from his mien that he some evil thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concocted, plain was seen. So to their swords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hey! He backward drew, and made a stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaning against the hedge, when to his aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprang Zan and the three <span xml:lang="pl">Czeczots</span>. After that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles were dispersed; but in this stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two on the hand were wounded, one received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cut upon the ear; the others mounted</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>On horseback.</span>
					<span>Then Gervasy and the Count</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrange the ranks, distribute arms, commands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last all down the settlement’s long street</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gallop, loud shouting, “Down, down with <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>!”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
