<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book II: The Castle</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Castle</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">A hunt with greyhounds of a singled-out hare⁠—The guest in the castle⁠—The last of the courtiers relates the history of the last of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span>⁠—A glance into the orchard⁠—The maiden among the cucumbers⁠—Breakfast⁠—Madam Telimena’s Petersburg anecdote⁠—Fresh outbreak of the Kusy and Sokol disputes⁠—Robak’s intervention⁠—The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s speech⁠—Pledges⁠—After mushrooms.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Which of us does not recollect those years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, as a lad, with rifle on his shoulder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went forth, whistling loudly, to the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where neither mound nor hedge a hindrance made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his footstep; where, o’erstepping ridges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou seest not that they mark a stranger’s land?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because in Litva, like a ship at sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunter by whatever path he will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expatiates freely o’er the ample space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or like a prophet gazes on the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where in the clouds are many signs, beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By hunter’s eye; or like a wizard he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Converses with the earth, which, dumb to cits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With multitude of voices whispers him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There screeched the landrail from the mead; but vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It were to seek him, for he glides away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In grass, as in the Niemen does the pike.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There overhead the springtide’s morning bell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang out⁠—the lark in heaven as deeply hid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eagle, with broad pinions through heaven’s plains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High soars, affrighting sparrows, as a comet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth frighten princes;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a> but beneath the bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue sky, the hawk, like moth on pin impaled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flaps with his wings, till in the plain he views</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bird or hare, and on it swift descends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Like to a falling star.</span>
					<span>Ah! when will Heaven</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Permit us to return from wandering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dwell once more among our native plains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serve in that cavalry which wars on hares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in that infantry which carries arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the birds? To know no weapon-stores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except the scythe or sickle, nor gazette,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Except our household reckonings!</span>
					<span>The sun</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had risen o’er <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>, and now fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the thatch, and through the crannies stole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the barn, and o’er the dark-green hay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh and sweet-smelling, whereof the young men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had made their couch. The golden, sparkling streaks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streamed widely from the opening in black thatch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like ribbons out from tresses; with the ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of morning light the sun the sleepers’ lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did tickle, as a maiden may awake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her lover with a corn-ear. Now the sparrows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bustling, began to chatter ’neath the thatch;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times the geese did cackle; after them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chorus like an echo woke, of ducks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turkeys, and the oxen’s lowing rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>While to the field they passed.</span>
					<span>The young men rose</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still Thaddeus lay asleep, for he had sunk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slumber latest; from last night’s repast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came back so unquiet, that at cock-crow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He opened not his eyes, and on his couch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned and turned again, and in the hay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He plunged as though in water, and slept sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until a chilly wind blew in his eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The creaking barn-door opened with a crash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in Friar Robak came, with knotted girdle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclaiming: “<i xml:lang="pl">Surge, puer!</i>” and unwound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roughly the knotted girdle on his shoulders.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now in the court were heard the hunters’ shouts:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They led the horses there, drove carriages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the gate; scarce might the courtyard hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So large a company; the horns awoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kennels were opened, and the greyhound pack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed forth, with joyous whinnying, as they saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunters’ horses and the prickers’ leashes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dogs, as mad they whip about the court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then haste, and clap the collars on their necks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this portends a hunting excellent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last the Chamberlain gave forth command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To set out. Slowly then the hunters marched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One following the other. But when passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gate, the long file scattered far and wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Midmost the Assessor by the Regent rode;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though each on each at times misliking looked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They held discourse of friendship, as beseems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All men of honour, going to decide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mortal quarrel; none might from their words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discern their hatred. The Pan Regent led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kusy, the Assessor Sokol. From behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ladies came in carriages; the youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trotting beside the wheels, held converse with</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The ladies.</span>
					<span>Through the court Friar Robak paced</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rapid strides, his matins finishing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But cast a glance on Master Thaddeus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And frowned, and smiled. At last he signed to him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up then rode Thaddeus; Robak made a sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of threatening; but ’spite of questionings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prayers of Thaddeus, that the Friar would say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plainly unto him what he would, the monk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deigned not to look or answer; but he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His cowl around him closer, and his prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concluded; and so Thaddeus rode away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And joined the guests.</span>
					<span>The hunters then first held</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their leashes; each one moveless in his place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remained, and to the other made a sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of silence; all their eyes turned to a stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which the Judge was standing. He observed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The game, and by the beckoning of his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expressed his orders. Each one understood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stood still; in the centre of the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Assessor and the Regent ambled now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being nearer, Thaddeus forestalled them both;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood beside the Judge, and looked around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas long since he had been afield, and on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wide grey space, ’twas hard to see the hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And more so ’mid grey stones. The Judge to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pointed it out. The poor hare crouching sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath a stone, and pricking up its ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its crimson eye the hunters’ glances met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as enchanted, and its destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foreseeing, still it could not turn its eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away from theirs for very fright, and sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the stone, lifeless itself as stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile the dust drew ever nearer on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plain. On Kusy flew, and Sokol after;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard following the Assessor and the Regent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together shouting “Vytcha!” from behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They vanished with the dogs in clouds of dust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While thus they chased the hare, the Count appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the forest by the castle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The neighbourhood well knew this gentleman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was never punctual to the appointed time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he this day had overslept the dawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he his servants rated, and beholding</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunters in the field, made haste to join them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His surtout long and white, of English cut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew with loose skirts upon the wind behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mounted servants followed him, who wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hats shaped like mushrooms, shiny, black, and small,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short jackets, and high top-boots, and white trousers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those servants whom the Count in such wise clad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were in his palace jockeys<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a> called. They flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the meadow, when the Count remarked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The castle, and he stayed his horse. He now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First saw the castle in the morning light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scarce believed they were those same old walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So had the dawn their outline beautified.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count much wondered at a sight so new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tower to him far-off seemed doubly high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For clear it stood against the morning mists.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The metal roof shone golden in the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In window-grates below the remnants gleamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shivered glass, that broke the eastern rays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In many rainbows various. A veil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of morning mist the lower storeys wreathed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hid their rents and breaches from the eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunters’ far shouts, driven by the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were echoed frequent from the castle walls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hadst sworn the shout proceeded from the castle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And underneath the veiling of the mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The walls were built, and peopled once again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count loved novel and unusual sights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called them romantic, and was used to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he had a romantic head; in truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a strange man, for not seldom he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When following a fox, or after hares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would suddenly stop still, and mournfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look upward to the sky, like to a cat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When on a lofty pine she sees a sparrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He often wandered without gun or dog,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the thicket, like a ’scaped recruit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He often sat unmoving by a brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With head bent o’er the stream, like to a heron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who’d swallow all the fishes with his eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such were the Count’s strange habits. Every one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said he lacked something; still they felt respect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him, since he was from his ancestors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lord, and rich, and good unto the peasants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind to his neighbours, even to the Jews.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Count’s horse, turned aside, along the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambled straight onward to the castle doors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being now alone, the Count did heave a sigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazed on the walls, then from his pocket drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paper and pencil, and some figures traced.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did he look aside, and saw a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some twenty paces off, who, like himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lover of fine views, with head upraised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared to number all the building’s stones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once he knew him, but the Count must call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A many times aloud, before Gervasy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could hear his voice. He was a nobleman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A servant of the castle’s former lords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last remaining courtier of <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tall old man, and hoary, with a face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearty and healthy, ploughed with wrinkles, sad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Severe; though once for joyousness renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the nobles; but aye since that fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which the castle’s lord had lost his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy totally was changed, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many years had neither been to fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wedding; from that time his witty jests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more were heard, and nevermore was seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A smile upon his face. He ever wore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancient livery of <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>’s house;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A yellow jacket, with long hanging skirts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound round with lace, which, now a faded yellow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had once been golden. Round his neck were broidered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-goats, armorial bearings of that house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence all the neighbourhood called the old man</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="pl">Polkozic</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a> also from a word which he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repeated ceaselessly, <i xml:lang="pl">Mopanku</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a> called him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Notchpate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a> at times, from his bald pate all covered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With seams and scars; his true name was Rembajlo;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His crest unknown. He called himself the <i xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because he held that office years ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still a bunch of keys wore at his girdle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound by a cord with silver tassel, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He nothing had to open, for the doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood open in the castle. Yet he found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two doors within, and at his own expense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repaired and set them up, and every day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amused himself with opening these doors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He for himself an empty chamber chose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the castle, for his private dwelling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although he might have eaten bread of favour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Count’s house, he would not, for he felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homesick, and unwell everywhere, if he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Breathed not the air of the old castle.</span>
					<span>Soon</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he perceived the Count, he doffed his cap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honouring with reverence his lord’s far-off kin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low bending his bald pate, that gleamed afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like an axe by many sword-blades scathed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stroked it with his hand, approached, and low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bending once more, said in sad tones: “Mopanku,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Panisko,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a> pardon me that thus I speak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious Sir Count, it is my custom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not disrespectful, for the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span> all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were used to say Mopanku; the last Pantler,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>My master, always would employ that word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it true, Mopanku, that you grudge the cost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lawsuits, and will give this castle up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>? I would not believe it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thus they say in all the district.” Here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing upon the castle, without ceasing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He sighed.</span>
					<span>“What wonder,” said the Count, “the cost</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is great; the trouble greater still; I want</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To end it. But that tedious old noble</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is obstinate; he did foresee he could</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weary me out; and I in very deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer will oppose him. I to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay down my sword, accepting such conditions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As shall be offered to me by the court.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What, peace!” exclaimed Gervasy; “what, Mopanku!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peace with <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>!” As he uttered this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He writhed his lips, as greatly marvelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At his own speech. “What, peace, and the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mopanku and my dear lord, you are jesting!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How? shall the castle, shall <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>’s stronghold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass into the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas’</span> hands? My lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deign but dismount. Go we into the castle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let but my lord consider. He knows not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That which he does. My lord, refuse not me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dismount.” He held the stirrup for descent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went into the castle. There Gervasy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood on the threshold of the hall awhile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here,” said he, “by their court surrounded, sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancient lords, in high chairs. After dinner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lord would judge the quarrels of the peasants;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, if in a good humour, to his guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Related curious histories, or else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would entertain with merry jests and tales.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the courtyard would the young men strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At single-stick, or rode on Turkish ponies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Expressly bred for noblemen.”</span>
					<span>They entered</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hall. Gervasy said: “In this great hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stone-paved, we find not now so many stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they broached wine-casks in the good old times.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noblemen invited to the diet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or <i xml:lang="pl">sejmik</i>, on the name-day of my lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or for the chase, drew beer-tubs from the cellars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tied to their girdles. And while passed the feast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Musicians stood within that lofty choir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The organ playing,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a> and other instruments;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when a health was drunk the trumpets brayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In chorus, as upon the judgment day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each <i xml:lang="pl">vivat</i> went around in order due,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first health to his Majesty the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They drank, and next the Primate’s health,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a> and after</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto her Majesty the queen, the health</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the nobles, and the whole Republic.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the fifth bumper had at length been drained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They raised the toast of ‘Love we one another.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="pl">Vivat</i> unceasing sounded till the dawn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each one’s equipage all ready stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear each reveller unto his house.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They now had passed some chambers. Silently</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy now his glance fixed on the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now on the archèd roof, recalling here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tragic memory, and now one dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then as he had said, “All now is o’er,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He nodded grievingly his head; at times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He waved his hand; remembrance visibly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was torture to him, and he fain would chase it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length they stayed their steps, in a great hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above, once lined with mirrors, but to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The frames stood empty of the looking-glass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long torn away; the windows held no panes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A balcony stood opposite the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here entering, the old man bowed his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his hands concealed his face, and when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He did unveil it, on it was a look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of deepest sorrow and despair. The Count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though ignorant what this should signify,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet looking on the old man’s countenance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt strangely moved, and pressed his hand. Awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This silence lasted, which the old man broke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaking his right hand lifted. “There is no</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agreement for the blood of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>With this <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>. In your veins, Mopanku,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blood of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span> flows. You are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A kinsman of the Pantler from your mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who the Lowczyna being,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a> was derived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the second daughter of the Castellan,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who was, as well is known, my master’s uncle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen, my lord, to your own kindred’s story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which in this chamber, and no other, passed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The Pantler, my late master, chiefest lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in this district, rich and of high race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had but one child, a daughter, beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As an angel; so brave noblemen and lordlings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courted the <i xml:lang="pl">Stolnikowna</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a> And among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noblemen was one great rioter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A quarreller, <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek Soplica</span>, named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojewode</span>⁠—in jest⁠—but yet in truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was of great importance in the region,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because he held beneath his captaincy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clan of the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>, and could rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All their three hundred votes at his own will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though for himself, beyond a bit of land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sabre, and a mighty pair of whiskers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From ear to ear, he was possessed of nought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet the Pantler often had as guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This brawler, and received him in his palace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most at the time of <i xml:lang="pl">sejmiks</i>. Popular</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his relations and supporters, soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This whiskered fellow so puffed up with pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Became, by cause of these receptions gracious,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took into his head the Pantler’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be. More often without invitation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rode unto the castle, and at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He made his nest among us, as though in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His own house. And he had declared his wish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that already they had taken heed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And served him at the table with black broth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be he pleased the Stolnikowna’s eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she concealed the matter from her parents.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those were <span xml:lang="pl">Kosciuszko</span>’s times; my lord supported</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ordinances of the Third of May,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had already gathered noblemen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To march to help of the Confederates;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When suddenly the Muscovites by night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surprised the castle; scarce was time to fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mortar off, in signal of distress;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bar the lower doors, and with the bolts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make them fast. In all the castle were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Stolnik only, and myself, the lady,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chief cook and two scullions (all three drunk),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parish priest, two lackeys, and four <i xml:lang="pl">heyduks</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallant men! So then unto our guns!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the windows! There a crowd of Muscovites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouting ‘Hurra!’ They from the gate rushed o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The terrace; we with ten guns, man for man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fired on them. Nought was to be seen from thence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servants fired off from the lower floors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My lord and I fired from the gallery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unceasingly; all went in order good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though in much fear. Upon this floor there lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here twenty guns; we fired off one; another</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was loaded quick; the priest himself in this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Service was very active, and the lady,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her daughter, and the serving-maidens too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were three marksmen, and the fire went on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unceasingly. The Muscovites below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent up a hail of bullets. We less often,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with more judgment fired down from above.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times they burst out there before the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three pairs of legs were kicking every time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So underneath the storehouse soon they fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For shelter. But already it was day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pantler came forth joyous with his gun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the balcony, and soon as peeped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Muscovitish head from underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The storehouse, did he fire immediately,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never missed. At every shot there fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A black hat in the grass, and rarely now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did any steal forth from behind the wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pantler seeing all his enemies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus struck with fear, to make a sortie thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And calling to his servants from above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave commands, then turning round to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said, ‘Follow me, Gervasy.’ At that moment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shot came from the gate. The Pantler groaned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew red, then pale, would speak, and coughed with blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw the ball, right in his very breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My lord, fast failing, pointed to the gate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew that villain! that <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>! knew him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his whiskers and his stature! By his shot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pantler died! I had seen it. And the villain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still held on high his lifted gun; the smoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still issued from the barrel! Him I took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For aim; the murderer stood as changed to stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twice did I fire, but missed with both the shots;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From rage or grief I marked but ill. I heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The women’s shriek⁠—I looked⁠—my lord was dead.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gervasy paused, and melted into tears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then said, concluding, “Now the Muscovites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had stormed the gate, for with the Pantler dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was as lost to sense, and knew not what</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was done around me. Happily arrived</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Parafianowicz</span> to us with succour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And twenty of the house of <span xml:lang="pl">Mickiewicz</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-75" id="noteref-75" epub:type="noteref">75</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He brought from <span xml:lang="pl">Horbatowicz</span>, noblemen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many and valiant, man for man, who hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span><span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>’s race since time began.</span>
					<span>Thus perished</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A powerful lord, upright and pious, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had Chairs, and Staffs, and Ribbons<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-76" id="noteref-76" epub:type="noteref">76</a> in his house;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A father to his peasantry, a brother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the nobles;⁠—and he left behind him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No son to swear revenge upon his grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet had he faithful servants! In the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowed from his wound I steeped my rapier, called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Penknife<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-77" id="noteref-77" epub:type="noteref">77</a>⁠—of my Penknife certainly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You have heard, my lord, renowned at every diet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Market, and <i xml:lang="pl">sejmik</i>⁠—I did swear to notch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blade upon the necks of the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I followed them at diet, foray, fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two in a quarrel slew I, two in duel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One burnt I up inside a wooden house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we with Rymsza harried <span xml:lang="pl">Korelicze</span>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like mud-fish was he roasted; and I count not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those ears I cut off. One alone remains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who no remembrance yet has had from me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Own younger brother to that whiskered rogue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet lives he, and he boasts him of his riches;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His boundary corners touch <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>’s castle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has honour in the district, holdeth office,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is a Judge. And will you give the castle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him, my lord? Shall his most wicked feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Efface my master’s blood from off this floor?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No! while Gervasy has a mite of soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so much strength, as with one little finger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stir his Penknife, hanging on the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So long <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span> shall not get this castle.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh!” cried the Count, and raised his hands aloft;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Twas a good instinct, that I loved these walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though knowing not what treasure in them lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such number of dramatic scenes and stories.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon as I shall recover from <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The castle of my ancestors, I will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Install thee in the palace as my Burgrave.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy tale, Gervasy, has much taken me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pity thou didst not bring me here at night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draped in a mantle: I would sit on ruins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shouldst tell me of these bloody deeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pity thou hast no great gift of relating.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sometimes have heard such, and read, traditions.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In England and in Scotland every lord’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Castle, in Germany each noble’s court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A theatre was of murders. Every ancient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noble, and powerful family had some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Report of blood or of some treacherous deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which must vengeance fall upon the heirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As legacy. I hear for the first time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of such in Poland. In me flows, I feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brave <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos’</span> blood, and I do know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That which is due to glory⁠—and my race!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes! I must break all compact with <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although it come to pistols or the sword⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honour commands!” With solemn step he strode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in deep silence came Gervasy after.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing before the door, unto himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count kept talking, and upon the castle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing, he quickly mounted on his horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His solitary conversation thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Absently ending: “ ’Tis a pity that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This old <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span> has no wife, fair daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose beauty I might worship! Loving her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet not able to obtain her hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would bring fresh complication in the tale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heart here, duty there; love here, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Revenge.”</span>
					<span>Thus whispering he spurred his steed.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It flew towards the mansion, as up rode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunters from the other side. The Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loved hunting; when the hunters he perceived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgetting all besides he sprang them toward.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He passed the gate, the garden, and the hedge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, turning round, he looked about, and stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horse before the hedge. There was the orchard!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The fruit-trees, set in rows, did shadow o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The broad fields; ’neath the trees the garden beds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cabbage here, its bald and hoary pate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low bending, seems to meditate upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fate of vegetables; the slim bean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weeping its pods into the tresses of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The carrot green, did turn a thousand eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon it; there the Indian corn upraised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its golden plume; and here and there was seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gourd’s fat belly, from its stalk detached,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which to a distant part had rolled away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the crimson beetroot as a guest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The garden beds were parted by a ridge:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In every trench there stood, as though on guard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hemp in ranks; a cypress-seeming herb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quiet, and green, and upright. In its leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And odour garden beds do find defence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For through these leaves no viper dares to creep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their odour also grubs and vermin slays.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White stalks of poppies tower further on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou thinkest, swarms of butterflies thereon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are sitting, fluttering their wings, whose lustre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of precious gems doth change with rainbow tints.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lively colours of much variousness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poppy lures the eye. Among the flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the full moon among the lesser stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sunflower, with its round, large, burning face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From east to west twists, following the sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beneath the hedge long, narrow, convex hillocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without or trees, or flowers, or bushes, made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A garden there for cucumbers; they grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Luxuriantly, with their large, wide leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Covering the beds, like carpet with deep folds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among them walked a damsel, clothed in white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunging in green luxuriance to her knees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down-bending in the furrows from the beds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed she walked not, but she swam through leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While bathing in their colour. She had veiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her head with a straw hat, and from her brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two rosy ribbons waved, and some bright curls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of loose dishevelled tresses. In her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She held a basket; she cast down her eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifted her right hand, as though to seize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a child who bathing chases fishes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That play around her feet; so she each moment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hand and basket bent down for the fruit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck by her foot, or by her eye perceived.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Count, enchanted by such wondrous sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood silent. Hearing trampling from afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his companions, with his hand he signed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To them to stay their horses; and they stayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gazed with stretched neck, like a long-beaked crane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the flock, as sentry on one leg</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing, with watchful eyes, and not to sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding a stone within his other claw.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A rustle on his shoulders and his brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aroused the Count; it was the Bernardine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friar Robak, and he had within his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upraised, his girdle with its knotty cords.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do you want cucumbers?” he shouted. “Sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here have you cucumbers!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a> Beware of harm!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in these beds there grow no fruits for you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing will come of this.” Then with his finger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He threatened him, drew down his cowl, and went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count remained a while yet on the spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughing, and cursing too at the same time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This sudden interruption. To the garden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His glance returned; she was not in the garden;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only in centre of a little window,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flitted her rosy ribbon and white frock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the garden beds was visible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The way she fled by; for a green leaf, which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her foot disturbed in running, trembled yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment, until quiet, like the water</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bird hath cloven with its wings; and on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spot where late she stood, the little basket</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of willow, with its under side upturned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fruit all spilled, was hanging on the leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’mid the verdant billows still it rocked.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>After a moment lonely everywhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gloomy ’twas. The Count now fixed his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the house, and pricked his ears up, still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In meditation, and the hunters stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet motionless before him; till there rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the silent, solitary house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A murmur first, then noise, and joyous shout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in an empty hive, when bees fly in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sign was this the guests had come from hunting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And servants hastened to get ready breakfast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through all the rooms a great confusion reigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They carried dishes, bottles, covers round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men, as they had entered, in green jackets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With plates and glasses, walking through the rooms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ate, drank, or leaning on the window-sill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conversed of rifles, greyhounds, and of hares.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain, his wife, the Judge, together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All three sat at a table; in a corner</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youthful ladies whispered to each other.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such order as at dinner and at supper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not observed. This was a novel custom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In an Old-Polish house at breakfast time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge, though he unwillingly allowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This great disorder, yet approved it not.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dishes of various sorts for men and women</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were. Here trays were carried round about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the whole coffee service; large-sized trays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With flowers beautifully painted. On them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steaming with an aroma most delicious,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White metal coffee-pots, and porcelain cups,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Dresden; near each cup a tiny vessel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Containing cream. Such coffee as in Poland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in no other country. For in Poland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a well-ordered house, by ancient custom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a woman, whose especial labour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is to make coffee, called the <i xml:lang="pl">kawiarka</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>She brings from town, or from the barges chooses<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The finest coffee-beans, and secrets knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to prepare a drink, which has the blackness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of coal, transparency of amber, odour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mocha, and is thick as honey flows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well know we what to coffee is good cream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is not in the country hard to get.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <i xml:lang="pl">kawiarka</i>, having early placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coffee-pots, the dairy visiteth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And culls herself the light, fresh flower of cream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For each cup in a vessel separate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So each be clad in separate pellicle.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The elder ladies, having earlier risen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had drunk their coffee. Now they made a second</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dish for themselves, of warm beer, white with cream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which there floated many clots of curd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for the men there lay smoked meats at choice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fat breasts of geese, and ham, and wings of tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All excellent, all by home method dried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In chimneys, by the smoke of juniper.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length was brought the latest course of <i xml:lang="pl">zrazy</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-83" id="noteref-83" epub:type="noteref">83</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such were the breakfasts in the Judge’s house.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the two rooms gathered two different groups;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The elder folks, around a little table,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spoke of new farming methods, and of new</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aye more strict Imperial ukases.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain opinions gave of rumours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of war impending, and deduced therefrom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Views upon politics. The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wearing dark spectacles, with fortune-telling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From cards amused the Chamberlain’s lady, while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the other room the youths discussed the hunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tones more low and peaceful than was wont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Assessor and the Regent, both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great talkers, first in hunting, and best shots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat opposite each other cross and angry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both well had pricked their dogs on; each was sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His greyhound must be winner; when right in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The middle of the plain they found a row</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of peasant’s vegetables still unreaped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therein the hare rushed. Kusy now had hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now Sokol, when the Judge the prickers stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the ridge. They must obey, although</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their rage was great. The dogs returned alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none might know if fled the game or ta’en,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one could guess if into Kusy’s jaws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It fell, or Sokol’s, or in both at once.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each side gave different judgment, and the quarrel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remained to other times still undecided.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The ancient <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> walked from room to room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On both sides glancing with his absent eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He neither mingled in the hunters’ talk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor in the old men’s, and ’twas plainly seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head was taken up with something else.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bore a leathern fly-scare,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-84" id="noteref-84" epub:type="noteref">84</a> sometimes standing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still in one spot, he meditated long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And⁠—killed a fly that sat upon the wall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thaddeus and Telimena, standing in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doorway right between the two rooms, talked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone to one another; no great space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divided them from hearers, so they whispered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now Thaddeus learnt that his aunt Telimena</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was a rich lady, that they were not joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By bonds canonical in too close kinship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis even uncertain if aunt Telimena</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be really aunt unto her nephew, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His uncle call her sister, since their common</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Progenitors once called them so, in spite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of years’ disparity. That later on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She, living in the capital, had rendered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some service beyond measure to the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence much the Judge respected her, and loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the world, perhaps from vanity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To call himself her brother. Telimena</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From friendship would refuse him not this name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relieved at heart was Thaddeus by these sayings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many things besides did they declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one another. All this came to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In one short moment.</span>
					<span>In the right-hand room,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Regent careless said, to tempt the Assessor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I said so yesterday; our hunt could not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be a success; it is too early yet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corn is standing yet upon its stalk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many rows unreaped of peasants’ gardens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore stayed the Count away to-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count in hunting is experienced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes has talked of hunting, place, and time;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count from childhood has in foreign lands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been living, and he says it is a sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of barbarism to hunt, as we do here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without regard to articles of law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or regulations of the government,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Respecting no one’s hillocks or his ridges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ride o’er stranger’s ground without his knowledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To course the plains and hunting forests in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spring-time as in summer, or to kill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fox when he his coat is shedding, or</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To let the greyhounds worry hares with young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or rather torture them. The Count regrets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in this case the Muscovites to-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are far more civilised than we; for there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Czar has put forth ukases on hunting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is police inspection, and for those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who do transgress them there is punishment.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Towards the left room Telimena looked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fanning herself with cambric handkerchief:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“As I my mother love, the Count mistakes not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I well know Russia. You would not believe me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I have often said how praiseworthy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many reasons, is the vigilance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strictness of their government. I was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Petersburg, not only once, nor twice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet memories! sweet image of the past!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what a town! None of you, gentlemen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have ever been in Petersburg? Perhaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’d like to see the plan? I have the plan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my bureau. In summer all the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Petersburg is used to live in ‘datshies’⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is, in country palaces, for ‘datsha’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-85" id="noteref-85" epub:type="noteref">85</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Means village. In a little palace I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt, on the river Neva, not too far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not too near the town, on a low hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised artificially. Ah! what a house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was! I have the plan in my bureau.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One day, to my misfortune, was a house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my close neighbourhood, hired by some petty</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="pl">Czynownik</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-86" id="noteref-86" epub:type="noteref">86</a> who was sitting on commission.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He kept a many greyhounds. What a torment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have a small <i xml:lang="pl">czynownik</i> and a kennel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dwell near one! As often as I went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the garden with a book, to enjoy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moonlight, and the evening cool, at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dog flew in, and wagged his tail, and pricked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His ears up, just as he were mad. Not seldom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had I been terrified. My heart forebode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some evil from the dogs, and so it chanced;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as I walked one morning in the garden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A greyhound strangled at my feet my pet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bolognan spaniel. Ah! she was a charming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear little dog! I had her as a present,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A token of remembrance, from Prince Sukin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Intelligent and lively as a squirrel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have her portrait⁠—only I will not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go for it to the bureau. Seeing her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus strangled, from excessive agitation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had faintness, spasms, palpitations; and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps it had gone worse still with my health,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When happily upon a visit came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kirylo Gawrylicz Kozodusin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Master of Hunts at court. He asked the cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my ill-humour, and he presently</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commanded the official to be dragged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There by the ears; he stood there, trembling, pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And almost lifeless. ‘How then didst thou dare,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclaimed Kirylo, with a voice of thunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘To hunt down in the spring a doe with young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the Emperor’s very nose?’ In vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stupefied <i xml:lang="pl">czynownik</i> swore that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not begun the hunting season yet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, with the Master of the Hunt’s permission,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beast run down had seemed to him a dog,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not a doe. ‘What!’ cried Kirylo; ‘villain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou pretend to better understand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunting and species than I, Kozodusin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imperial Jägermeister? Let the Chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inspector of Police decide between us.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They call the Chief Inspector, and command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To institute inquiry. ‘I bear witness,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Says Kozodusin, ‘that it was a doe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he pretends ’twas a domestic dog.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decide between us, who best understands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunting and game.’ The Inspector of Police</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well knew his duty; he considered well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The insolence of the <i xml:lang="pl">czynownik</i>, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conducting him aside he counselled him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a brother, to confess his fault, and so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Condone his crime. The Master of the Hunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhat appeased, made promise he would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An intercessor with the Czar, and get</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some little mitigation of the sentence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It ended thus⁠—the dogs went to the rope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the <i xml:lang="pl">czynownik</i> had four weeks in prison.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This trifle entertained us all the evening.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next day an anecdote was made of this;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Master of the Hunt had gone to law</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About my dog. I even know for certain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Emperor himself has laughed at this.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A laugh arose in both the rooms. The Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was playing with the Bernardine at cards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at that moment, with the spades as trumps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was about to lead. The priest scarce breathed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge had caught the story’s first beginning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And listened so absorbed, that he sat still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With head uplifted, and the card upraised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready for playing; still he moveless sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And only caused the friar anxiety;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, the tale ended, he laid Pamfil down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And answered, laughing: “Let who will extol</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Civilisation of the Germans, order</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Muscovites; let people in great Poland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn from the Swabians to make laws for foxes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And call in soldiers to arrest a mastiff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who enters strangers’ thickets. Praised be Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Litva we have ancient customs. We</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have game enough, both for ourselves and neighbours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never shall for this make inquisition;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we have corn enough. Our dogs will not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reduce us soon to famine, or devour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Green vegetables, or take life away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er peasants’ acres I forbid all hunting.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Bailiff from the left-hand chamber spoke:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No wonder, gracious sir, that for such game</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You dearly pay. The peasants are right glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whene’er it happens that a greyhound springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among their vegetables; let him but</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disturb ten ears of rye, you give a sheaf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In compensation, nor even then are quits;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peasant often gets besides a florin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believe me, sir, the peasantry will grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most insolent”⁠—But never heard the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest of Master Bailiff’s reasonings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ’twixt the two discourses there began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand murmurs, anecdotes, and tales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And lastly, quarrels.</span>
					<span>Quite forgotten, Thaddeus</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Telimena thought but of each other;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lady much delighted that her wit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Thaddeus entertained; the youth returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her speech with compliments. With ever greater</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freedom spoke Telimena, and in tones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More low, and Thaddeus made believe that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could hear her not amid that crowd of talk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he drew nearer, whispering, so much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nearer to her, that upon his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt her brow’s sweet warmth. Restraining breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He caught her sighings with his lips, his glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seized eagerly the bright rays of her eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When suddenly between their lips there flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At first a fly, and then the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s fly-scare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Litva is abundance great of flies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among them an especial species, called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Noble,” like all the rest in shape and hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But having broader thorax and abdomen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And larger than the common sort. In flying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They make a great noise, and their humming is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to be borne. So strong, besides, are they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They break through spiders’ webs, or if they should</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be caught in one, three whole days long they buzz,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And singly can they grapple with a spider.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> well had searched into,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And also said the lesser sort of flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were from these “noble” flies engendered; they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were that among the flies that queen-bees are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among a swarm of bees; that slaying them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would cause the perishing of other vermin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>True, neither housekeeper, nor parish priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believed in these discoveries of the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the generation of the flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held differently; but never did the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave off his ancient custom. Scarcely saw he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fly, when straightway he pursued it. Now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This very instant, past his ear a “noble”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buzzed: twice the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> struck. Ashamed to miss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He struck a third time, and nigh broke the window</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until the fly, by this great noise distraught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing two people standing on the threshold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obstructing its return, did throw itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between their faces in despair; the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right hand flew after it. So strong the stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the two heads sprang backwards, as the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halves of a tree by lightning severed; both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rebounded with such force against the lintels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they retained upon them livid marks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But fortunately no one marked this scene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the conversation, which as yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though loud and high, had yet been orderly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now ended in an outburst strong of noise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like hunters, who along the forest chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fox, while here and there is heard the crash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of trees, the noise of shots, the bark of hounds:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all at once, and unexpectedly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pricker starts a wild-boar; he gives sign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shout arises in the crowd of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dogs, as all the forest trees had voice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So is it with discourse. It slowly moves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until it comes on some grand object, like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A boar-hunt. The wild-boar of this discourse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was that fierce quarrel of the Regent with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Assessor, touching their renownèd greyhounds:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It lasted but a short time, but they did</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much in one moment. For the two at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threw out so many words and loud abuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they exhausted soon the first three parts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a dispute, jesting, and anger, challenge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And it had come to fists already.</span>
					<span>So</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All rushed towards them from the second room.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a swift billow, rolling through the doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They bore down the young couple on the threshold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing, like Janus, god of double face.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ere Thaddeus and Telimena could</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compose the locks disordered on their brows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The threatening voices all were still again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A murmur mixed with laughter spread around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decision came to the dispute; the friar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had quelled it. He was strong and active, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old man, broad in shoulder-girth. So when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Assessor rushed up to the jurist, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both disputants were threatening one another</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By gestures, suddenly he collared both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of them behind, and twice he struck with force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their heads together, one against the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Easter eggs; then spread his arms abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shape of sign-post, threw the two apart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In separate corners of the room. Awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood upon the place with outstretched arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And “<i xml:lang="la">Pax vobiscum</i>,” cried he; “peace be with you!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those present greatly marvelled, even laughed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through that respect they owed a ghostly man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None dared to blame the monk, and after such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A proof of strength, none either had the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To enter on a quarrel with him. But</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friar Robak, soon as he had hushed the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought not, ’twas seen, the triumph of the fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He threatened not the brawlers more, nor chid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But drawing down his cowl, and planting both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hands on his girdle, silent left the room.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile the Chamberlain, likewise the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the two sides took their places. Then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, as awoken from deep thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stepped in the midst, his hoary whisker twirled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor spared important mien; he circled round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whole assembly with a fiery eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wheresoever he a murmur heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As priest his <i xml:lang="la">aspersorium</i>, he brandished</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fly-scare to command their silence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, Raising its handle high with dignity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like marshal’s rod, he silence thus commanded.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be still,” repeated he, “and have ye care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye, who are chiefest hunters in the district;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From your embittering quarrel what will spring?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know ye? Why, that the young men, upon whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our country founds her hopes, who ought to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrious our forests and our toils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who, alas! so much neglect the chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps will reap a fresh occasion for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despising it, on seeing how the men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who ought to give example to the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hunting only bring back quarrellings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And causes of dispute. And have respect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my grey hairs; for I knew greater hunters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than you, and often did I arbitrate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between them. Who in Lithuanian forests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span>’s equal, whether drawing in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The toils, or meeting with the beast? Or who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can liken him to <span xml:lang="pl">Bialopiotrowicz</span>?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where at the present day is such a marksman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As was the nobleman Zegota, who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could with a pistol hit a running hare?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew <span xml:lang="pl">Terajewicz</span>, who when he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hunt the wild-boar, took no other arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than a mere pike: and <span xml:lang="pl">Budrewicz</span>, who with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bear fought single-handed. Such the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That once our woodlands saw. And if it came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To quarrelling, how did they settle quarrels?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They chose them judges, and laid pledges down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oginski lost a hundred hides of forest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About a wolf! badger cost some hamlets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To <span xml:lang="pl">Niesiolowski</span>! And you, gentlemen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow the old example, and decide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your quarrel, even though by lesser pledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For words are wind; word quarrels ne’er have end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pity to dry up lips about a hare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So choose ye judges first to arbitrate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what they shall decree, religiously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Subscribe. I will entreat the Judge that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not forbid the pricker even to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ride over wheat. I’ll wager that I shall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obtain this grace from him.” And saying this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He pressed the Judge upon the knee.</span>
					<span>“A horse,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Regent cried, “I pledge a horse with trappings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will before the local court subscribe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself, that I lay down this ring, as fee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the Judge.”⁠—“And I,” the Assessor said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Will pledge my golden collars, made of shagreen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inlaid with wheels of gold, a leash of silk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose workmanship is wondrous as the stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shines upon it. I had wished to leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This set as legacy unto my children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In case I marry. It was given me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A present from Prince Dominik,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-87" id="noteref-87" epub:type="noteref">87</a> when once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hunted with him, and the Marshal, Prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Sanguszko</span>, and with General <span xml:lang="pl">Mejen</span>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref-88" epub:type="noteref">88</a> when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I challenged all the others to a trial</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of greyhounds. There, by unexampled stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In annals of the chase, I coursed six hares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one dog. At that time we hunted on</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Kupisko</span>’s plain. Prince <span xml:lang="pl">Radziwill</span> could not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit still upon his horse, but lighted down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taking in his arms my celebrated</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She-greyhound Kania, he kissed her head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times, and three times clapping on her muzzle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, ‘Henceforward I create thee Duchess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Kupisko. Napoleon thus gives dukedoms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his generals, from the places where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>They have won great victories.’ ”</span>
					<span>Telimena, weary</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of these o’er-long disputes, desired to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the courtyard, but she wished companions.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She took a little basket from a peg.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The gentlemen, I see, prefer to stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indoors, but I am going to pick mushrooms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they who please, I beg them follow me.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She spoke while folding round her head a crimson</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shawl of Cashmere; the Chamberlain’s young daughter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She took by one hand; with the other gathered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her robe about her ankles. Thaddeus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silence hastened after her for mushrooms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The notion of a walk rejoiced the Judge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw therein a means of breaking off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This noisy quarrel; therefore he exclaimed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To the wood, gentlemen, for mushrooms; he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who comes to table with the finest mushrooms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall sit beside the fairest lady; he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself shall choose her. If a lady find them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She shall herself select the finest lad.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
