<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book VIII: The Foray</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Foray</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s astronomy⁠—The Chamberlain’s observations on comets⁠—Mysterious scene in the Judge’s apartment⁠—Thaddeus, trying to extricate himself cleverly, gets into great trouble⁠—The new Dido⁠—The Foray⁠—The last protestation by the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>⁠—The Count captures <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>⁠—Storm, carnage⁠—Gervasy as butler⁠—The banquet of the foray.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Before a storm a still and gloomy hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes, while the cloud that soars o’er human heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands still, and with a threatening countenance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restrains the breath of winds; silent, it runs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the earth with eyes of lightning, marking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spots whereon its thunders shall be cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One after the other. Now this hour of stillness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came in the house of <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>; well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One might suppose that some presentiment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of strange events forthcoming, sealed all lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raised all spirits to the land of dreams.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The supper o’er, the Judge and guests went forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the court to enjoy the evening air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sit upon the banks all spread with turf.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The company, with still and gloomy cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked up into the sky, which seemed to lower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Itself, and narrower grow, and evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To approach the earth; till both beneath the veil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of darkness hidden, like a loving pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began their secret converse, by their sighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suppressed their love confessing, by their whispers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By murmurs, and by soft tones half aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That formed a wondrous music of the evening.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The owl began it, from the gable-roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hooting; and with the rustling of their wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bats did whisper; near the house they flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where window-panes and human faces gleamed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But nearer moths, the sisters of the bats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Circled in swarms, lured by the garments white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worn by the women; most they teased Sophia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Striking against her face and her bright eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mistaking them for lights. And in the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty ring of insects gathered round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playing like spheres of an harmonica.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia’s ear distinguished, ’mid the thousand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmurs, the chord of humming of the flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a false semitone the gnats created.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The evening’s concert in the fields was scarce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begun, for its musicians even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their instruments were tuning; now three times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The landrail screeched, the mead’s first violin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now from afar the bittern’s bass again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Re-echoed him from out the marsh; and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woodcocks, rising upwards, circled round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shrieked once, twice, as beating upon drums,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finale to the murmurs of the flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the birds’ cries; a double chorus woke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of two ponds, as among the Caucasus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those lakes enchanted, silent in the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But musical at evening. One pond, with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright water and a sandy shore, gave forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A solemn low sigh from its azure breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other pond, with muddy depths, and throat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More hoarse, replied with passionate grieving cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In both were singing countless hordes of frogs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both choirs were tuned unto two great accords;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One seemed fortissimo, the other soft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And piano; one appeared to cry aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other merely sighed; thus through the fields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each pond held converse with the other pond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like two Aeolian harps, that in their play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered each other. Thicker grew the dusk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And only in the grove, and round the osiers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the brook, were gleaming wolfish eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like candles. Far along the horizon’s verge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fires of shepherds’ camps gleamed here and there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last the moon uplit her silver torch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She issued from the thicket, and illumed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both sky and earth. From twilight now unveiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They slept beside each other, like to happy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consorts. The heaven in its pure arms embraced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bosom of the earth, by moonlight silvered.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now opposite the moon one star, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another, now a thousand gleamed, a million</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now twinkled; at the head of them shone bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Castor, together with his brother Pollux,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the ancient Slavs called Lel and Polel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-202" id="noteref-202" epub:type="noteref">202</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now in the zodiac of the common folk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Re-christened; one named Litva, and the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Crown.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-203" id="noteref-203" epub:type="noteref">203</a> The two Scales of the heavenly balance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shine further on; the Lord, upon the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the creation, as our old men tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weighed all the planets and the earth in turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon them, ere into the deeps of space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helaunched their weights. The golden balance then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hung in heaven; therefrom men received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The model of their scales and balances.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Towards the north the starry circle shines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that famed Sieve,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-204" id="noteref-204" epub:type="noteref">204</a> through which the Lord, they say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rye-grains sifted, which from heaven he threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To father Adam, banished from the garden</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of pleasure for his sin.</span>
					<span>A little higher</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands David’s chariot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-205" id="noteref-205" epub:type="noteref">205</a> ready for career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its long beam pointing to the polar star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancient Litvins of this chariot knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That common people wrongly call it David’s;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is an angel’s car. In it, ere time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rode Lucifer, when he defied the Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drove on headlong by the Milky Way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To heaven’s threshold, until Michael hurled him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down from his car, and cast it from the road.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now broken, doth it roll among the stars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Archangel Michael suffers not repair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this too know we from the old Litvini,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they no doubt first learned it from the Rabbins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Dragon of the zodiac, long and great,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-206" id="noteref-206" epub:type="noteref">206</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who winds his starry folds across the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom sages wrongly have the Serpent called,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No snake is, but a fish, Leviathan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere time he dwelt within the seas, but after</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deluge from the lack of water died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So angels hung him on the vault of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Partly for his strange figure, and in part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a remembrance; they suspended there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lifeless remnants, as the priest of Mir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once hung up in his church the fossil ribs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And vertebrae of giants.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-207" id="noteref-207" epub:type="noteref">207</a></span>
					<span>Such old stories</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the stars which he had learned from books,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or from tradition knew, the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> told.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although the ancient <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s sight was weak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At evening, and he could through spectacles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See nought in heaven, he knew by heart the names</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And figures of each constellation there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so he pointed out their every place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And orbit of their motion.</span>
					<span>Few to-day</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listened to him, or heeded not at all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sieve, the Dragon, or the Scales. To-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A new guest, hitherto unseen in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had drawn all eyes and thoughts unto itself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was a comet of first magnitude<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-208" id="noteref-208" epub:type="noteref">208</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And power, that in the west appeared, and flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the north, and with a blood-red eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked askance on the chariot, as it would</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assume the empty place of Lucifer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It threw long tresses backward, and therein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enwrapped the third part of the heavens, and gathered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in a net a thousand stars,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-209" id="noteref-209" epub:type="noteref">209</a> and drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Them after it, and measured ever higher</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To northward with its head, and pointed straight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Up to the Polar star.</span>
					<span>With unexpressed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foreboding, the Litvanian folk each night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazed on this heavenly wonder, and therefrom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deduced ill-omen, as from other signs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they too often heard the cries of birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ill-omened, who in flocks on desert plains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gather, and whet their beaks, as they expect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Corpses. Too often marked they how the dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tore up the earth, and as though scenting death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howled fearfully, portending war or famine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guardians of the forest had beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maiden of the pestilence pass through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cemetery, she whose brow is high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the highest trees, and whose left hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Waveth a bloodstained cloth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-210" id="noteref-210" epub:type="noteref">210</a></span>
					<span>Hence various</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conclusions drew, while standing by the hedge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The barn-keeper, who came to give account</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of farm work, and the district writer, with</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The bailiff whispering.</span>
					<span>But on the seats</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of turf before the house, the Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat; he broke in upon the guests’ discourse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It might be known he gathered voice to speak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his great snuff-box in the moonlight shone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entirely of pure gold, with brilliants set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The portrait of King Stanislas in midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind a glass. He tapped thereon, took snuff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spoke thus: “Master Thaddeus, your talk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the stars is but an echo of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I much prefer The things you heard at school.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To talk of wonders with the ignorant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I too attended lectures on the stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two years in Wilna, where the Puzynina,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rich and learnèd lady, gave the rent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hamlet of two hundred peasants yielded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To purchase various telescopes and glasses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Priest <span xml:lang="pl">Poczobut</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-211" id="noteref-211" epub:type="noteref">211</a> a most illustrious man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was then observer, and of the Academy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At that time rector. He, however, left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last his chair and telescope, returning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his convent, to his peaceful cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there he made most exemplary end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I likewise am acquainted with <span xml:lang="pl">Sniadecki</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-212" id="noteref-212" epub:type="noteref">212</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is extremely learnèd, though a layman.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But your astronomers consider planets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only as citizens may view a carriage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They know if to the capital it go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the king, or from the suburbs goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the frontier; but who rides therein?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what? whereof he with the king discoursed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if the king has sent his envoy forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With war, or as a messenger of peace?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They know not. In my time I recollect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How when Branicki<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-213" id="noteref-213" epub:type="noteref">213</a> drove his chariot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Jassow, and behind this wicked car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A train of <span xml:lang="pl">Targowica</span> traitors drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The train resembling of that comet there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The simple people then, although they ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In public councils mixed, at once could guess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That train the omen of some treason was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas said the people to this comet gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The name of Broom, and said ’twould sweep away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A million.”</span>
					<span>With a bow the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> answered,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“True, Most Illustrious, Powerful Chamberlain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I recollect now what was told to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once as a little boy. I recollect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though at that time I was not ten years old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When in our house I saw the late Sapieha,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-214" id="noteref-214" epub:type="noteref">214</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commander in the army, and who later</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Became Court Marshal of the Crown, and died</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last Grand Chancellor of Litva, aged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred and ten years. He, in the time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of John the Third, was at Vienna under</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The standard of the Hetman <span xml:lang="pl">Jablonowski</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well then, the Chancellor related how</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When John the Third on horseback mounted, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Papal legate blessed him on the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the Austrian ambassador</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did kiss his feet, and held the stirrup ready⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Count <span xml:lang="pl">Wilczek</span> the ambassador was named⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king exclaimed, ‘See what is doing in heaven!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They looked: behold, a comet sailed o’erhead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By that same way whereby Muhammad’s armies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marched on, from east to west. And later on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Priest <span xml:lang="pl">Bartochowski</span> wrote a panegyric</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the triumph of Krakow, by the title</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of <i xml:lang="la">Orientis Fulmen</i>, saying much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About this comet. I have likewise read</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About it in the work <i epub:type="se:name.publication">Janina</i> titled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where is related the whole enterprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the late King John, and where there is engraved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The standard of Muhammad, and besides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That comet, as we see this one to-day.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Amen,” the Judge said, “I accept your omen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May John the Third be with the star revealed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now in the west there is a mighty warrior;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be the comet brings him here to us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Heaven grant!” Thereto the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bending his head down sadly, “Comets sometimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mean war, and sometimes quarrels. ’Tis not good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shows itself right over <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be it threatens us some home misfortune.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We yesterday had strife and jar sufficient;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Regent had a quarrel with the Assessor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That morning, in the evening Master Thaddeus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called out the Count. This quarrel also came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the bear’s hide; if the good Judge had not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prevented me, I had made both disputants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agree at table. For I wished to tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A singular adventure, very like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The events of yesterday’s excursion; it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chanced to the foremost hunters of my time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The envoy <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span> and to Prince Denassau.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The accident was this:</span>
					<span>“The General</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Podolian lands went from Volhynia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his estates in Poland, or indeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If rightly I remember, to the Diet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Warsaw; on his way he visited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles, partly for amusement, partly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For popularity, and so he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thaddeus <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span>, now of holy memory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who later was our <span xml:lang="pl">Nowogrodek</span> envoy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in whose house I grew up from a child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span>, on the General’s arrival,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invited guests. There gathered many nobles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a theatre, for the Prince loved theatres</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Kaszyc</span>, who dwelt in <span xml:lang="pl">Jatrze</span>, fireworks gave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pan Tyzenhaus sent dancers, and musicians</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oginski and Pan Soltan, who then lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In <span xml:lang="pl">Zdzienciele</span>. In a word, they gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An entertainment in the house past wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the forest was a grand hunt made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis known to you that nearly all, so far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I remember, of the <span xml:lang="pl">Czartoryskis</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although proceeding from <span xml:lang="pl">Jagellon</span> blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are little apt at hunting, not indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From idleness, but from their foreign tastes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Prince-General more often looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On books than on the kennel, and more often</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On ladies’ balconies than on the woods.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But in the Prince’s suite there came the German</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prince Denassau, of whom ’twas said that when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sojourned in the Libyan land, he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A-hunting, and he there a tiger<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-215" id="noteref-215" epub:type="noteref">215</a> slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With spear in single combat, and of this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty boasting Prince Denassau made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We hunted at this season the wild boar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span> a monstrous sow killed with a rifle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At great risk, since he fired from very near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each of us marvelled at the shot, and praised.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The German Denassau alone did hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These praises with indifference, and muttered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘A clever shot needs only a bold eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But steel a bold hand,’ and began to brag</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length about his Libya and his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About his negro kings, and of his tiger.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span> took this very ill; he was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man of temper quick; he struck his sabre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said, ‘Sir Prince! whoever looketh bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should boldly fight; a wild boar’s worth a tiger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sabre worth a spear;’ and they began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A conversation over-warm. But then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The General happily broke in on them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, speaking French, he made them to agree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What there he said I know not, but it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only as ashes laid upon hot coals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span> took this much to heart; he waited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only an opportunity, and promised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make the German pay for this. Well-nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He paid with his own life for this offence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And did it on the morrow, as I’ll tell.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here ceased the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, and his right hand raised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for his snuff-box asked the Chamberlain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He long time used it, and deigned not to end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His story, as he thought thereby to sharpen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The listeners’ curiosity. At last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This curious story he resumed; they listened</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fixed attention; but again the tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was broken off. For some one to the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had sent a messenger, to say that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was waiting with some business very urgent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which might not be deferred. Good-night then giving</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the assembly, took the Judge his leave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They parted and went divers; some to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inside the house; the others in the barn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the hay. Then went the Judge to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>An audience to the traveller.</span>
					<span>The rest</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already slept. But Thaddeus crept along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The passages, and like a sentry paced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All up and down before his uncle’s door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he in weighty matters must request</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His counsel ere he sleep. He dared not knock;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge had locked the door, and secretly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conversed with some one. Thaddeus waited till</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The end should come, and listened at the door.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He heard within a sobbing. Stirring not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The latch, he gazed, with careful heeding, through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The keyhole. There he saw a wondrous thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge and Robak kneeling on the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embracing, while they wept with bitter tears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robak the hands was kissing of the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge embraced the priest upon the neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wept. At last, a quarter of an hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being past while they kept silence, Robak spoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>These words in a low voice:</span>
					<span>“The Lord knows, brother,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hitherto have kept those secret vows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I in sorrow made, beneath the seal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of absolution; that all consecrate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To God and to my country, serving not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride, neither seeking earthly glory, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have lived till now, and I have willed to die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Bernardine, discovering not my name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not hiding from the vulgar only, but</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thee and mine own son. Yet from the Father</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Provincial I had leave, in case of death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make full revelation of my name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who knows if I return alive? Who knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What may occur? In Dobrzyn, brother, is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great, great confusion. Still the French are far;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winter must pass by; we still must wait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But nothing can withhold the nobles. I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps was far too busy with this rising;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps they understood me ill. The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has spoilt it all. That madman Count, I hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to Dobrzyn. I could not forestall him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a weighty reason why I could not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For old Matthias has recognised me; if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lets the secret out, I then must give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My neck unto the Penknife. Nothing will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restrain the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>. ’Tis but a small matter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About my head, but such discovery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would break the whole web of conspiracy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet I must be there to-day, to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What they are doing, even though I die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without me all the nobles will go mad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell to thee, farewell, my dearest brother!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must make haste. If I should perish, thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone must breathe a sigh forth for my soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In case of war, the secret unto thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is known, do thou complete what I began.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember ever, thou art a <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The priest here dried his eyes, composed his frock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew down his cowl, in silence opened wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The window at the back, and from the window</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sprang into the garden; left alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge sat in an arm-chair, and he wept.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A moment waited Thaddeus, ere he stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The latch; the door was opened, and he entered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silence, and low bending, said, “Good uncle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few days scarcely have I tarried here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These days passed like a minute. I have not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had time sufficient to enjoy thy house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And presence; yet I now must ride away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hasten, even to-day, my uncle, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be far away to-morrow. You indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember we the Count have challenged. ’Tis</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My business to fight with him; I have sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The challenge. Duelling in Litva is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbidden; I will go unto the frontier</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Warsaw’s Duchy. Though the Count indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coxcomb is, he has no lack of courage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’ll surely come unto the place assigned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We will arrange our meeting, and as fitting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll punish him, if Heaven prosper me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from the shores of the Lososna I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will swim the stream, upon whose farther shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our brothers’ ranks await me. I have heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father’s testament commanded me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To serve in the army, and I know not who</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>This testament has cancelled.”</span>
					<span>Said the uncle:</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My Thaddeus, are you in boiling water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thus you twist round like a hunted fox,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wags his tail one way, but runs another?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We sent a challenge truly, and ’tis fitting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight; but why such haste? why go to-day?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The usual custom is, before a duel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To send a friend, and make conditions. Then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count may beg our pardon, deprecate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You wait a little; there is time enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless some other demon drives you hence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me sincerely, why so roundabout?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am your uncle, and though old, I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What young hearts are; I have been to thee a father”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This saying, he stroked him underneath the chin⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My little finger has already whispered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something of this to me, that you have some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affairs among the ladies-hang it! now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young men take quickly to the ladies! Well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thaddeus, confess it all to me, and truly.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“True,” stammered Thaddeus; “true; some other reasons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are, dear uncle; ’tis my fault perhaps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An error a misfortune! hard to mend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear uncle, no, I dare no longer stay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fault of youth! My uncle, ask no more!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must from <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span> part in haste.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ho!” said the uncle, “love disputes no doubt!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I marked how yesterday you bit your lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While looking on a certain little girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Askance. She also had, as I perceived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little pouting mien. I know these fooleries!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How when a pair of children are in love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis sorrow measureless; they now rejoice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now are cross and sad. Heaven knoweth why, they quarrel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both tooth and nail; now, sulking in their corners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will not speak to one another, even</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes they run away into the fields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If this has chanced to you, I’ll take on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reconcile you soon. I know these fooleries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I once was young. So tell me all, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May also in my turn discover something.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>We both will make confession.”</span>
					<span>“Uncle,” then</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said Thaddeus, as he kissed his hand, and blushed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’ll tell the truth entirely. This young lady,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your ward, Sophia, pleased me very much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although I have but seen her twice. They say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You mean the daughter of the Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be my wife; she is beautiful, and is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughter of a rich man, but I cannot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marry Miss Rosa when I love Sophia.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s hard to change one’s heart, nor would it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An honourable act, to marry one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love another. Time may be will cure me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll ride away from here for a long time.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thaddeus,” broke in the uncle, “this to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seems a strange way of loving, from the loved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fly. ’Tis well for thee thou art sincere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou seest thou wouldst have done a foolish thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou hadst ridden off. What shouldst thou say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I myself betrothed Sophia to thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>What! dost not jump for joy?”</span>
					<span>Said Thaddeus,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After a while had passed: “Your goodness, sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Astonishes me. But how can it be?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your favour is of no avail to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all my hopes, alas! are but in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Madam Telimena will not give</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Sophia to me.”</span>
					<span>“We will entreat her,” said</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The Judge.</span>
					<span>“No, no one can prevail with her,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Thaddeus answer; “no, I may not tarry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear uncle, I must quickly ride away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow, uncle; give me but thy blessing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have prepared all things; I’ll ride at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the Duchy.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twirling his moustache,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge with anger looked upon the boy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“So this is thy sincerity? ’tis thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou openest thy heart to me? At first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This duel, then ’tis love, and this departure!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fie on it! In this is some complication.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have talked to me, and I have tracked your steps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are a libertine and a deceiver!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You have told me lies! Where went you yesterday?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why like a weasel crept you near the house?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Thaddeus, if you could deceive Sophia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now will fly, young man, you shan’t succeed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love or not love, I tell in truth to you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you shall wed Sophia, and to-morrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You stand upon the carpet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-216" id="noteref-216" epub:type="noteref">216</a> And if not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stripes! Talk to me of feelings, changeless heart!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art a liar! I will find out all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About you, Master Thaddeus; fie upon you!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll give you a good scolding even yet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have had enough of trouble in the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until my head does ache; and still this fellow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not allow me yet to go to sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go you to bed!” This saying, he opened wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The door, and called the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> to undress him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In silence Thaddeus went, with drooping head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This painful conversation with his uncle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thought discussing. ’Twas the first time he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been so harshly chidden; yet he felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The justice of this sharp reproach. He blushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before his very self. What should he do?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What if Sophia should hear of this? Entreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her hand? And what would Telimena say?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, he must stay no more in <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus deep in thought he scarce had gone two steps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When something crossed his path; he stopped, he saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A phantom all in white, long, slender, thin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She glided towards him with her outstretched hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whence the trembling moonlight back was thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And coming near, low sighed she, “Thankless man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once thou didst seek my glance, thou shun’st it now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou didst my conversation seek, but now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost close thine ears, as though within my words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in my looks, a deadly poison lurked.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis well, I know thee what thou art⁠—a man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unknowing coquetry, I had no wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To torture thee. I made thee happy; thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou repay me? O’er a heart too soft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This victory has made thy heart too hard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because thou hast too easy conquest made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou dost despise my heart too soon! ’Tis well!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, taught by such experience, credit me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far more than thou canst do, I scorn myself.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Said Thaddeus, “Telimena, Heaven forbid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart were hard, or that I should avoid thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From scorn; but thou thyself consider this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They spy upon us, track our steps. Can we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus openly? What will be said? It were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unsuitable. By Heaven, it were a sin.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“A sin?” she answered, with a bitter smile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou innocent! thou lamb! I, though a woman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Care not about a love-affair, although</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I were discovered, though I were dishonoured.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, thou art a man! What injury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one of you, although he should confess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To having with ten women all at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love passages? Speak thou the truth, dost thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wish to abandon me?” She burst out weeping.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But, Telimena, what would the world say,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spoke Thaddeus, “of the man, who at my age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these days, being sound, in the country lived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loved, when now so many youths, so many</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ev’n married men from wives and children part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To go beyond the frontier, and to gather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the nation’s standard? Though I should</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Desire to stay, does that depend on me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father in his testament ordained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should in the Polish army serve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now my uncle this command repeats.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go to-morrow, my resolve is fixed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Heaven forbid that I should change it now.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I,” Telimena said, “would not obstruct</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy path to glory, nor thy fortunes mar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art a man, thou’lt find a love more worthy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy heart; one richer, fairer, thou wilt find.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let me only for my comfort know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before our parting, that thine inclination</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards me was true love. That ’twas not only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A jest, no vain debauch, but love indeed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me but know my Thaddeus loves me still!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me the words, ‘I love,’ hear from thy lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me engrave them on my heart, and write them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my thought. More easily will I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgive thee, even if thou cease to love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering how thou once didst bear me love.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Here she began to sob.</span>
					<span>Thaddeus was moved</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pity, seeing how she wept, and prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So tenderly, and asked so small a thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purest grief and pity him possessed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had he searched his spirit’s inmost depths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had not known for certain, if or no</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loved her. So he spoke with earnestness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“May I be struck by lightning, Telimena,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ’tis not true I liked thee very much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or loved, by Heaven! Short the moments were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we together spent, but they for me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sweetly passed, so dear they are, that long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will be ever present to my thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Heaven forbid that I forget thee aye.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Telimena sprang upon his neck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I hoped for this,” she said; “thou lovest me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore I live. For I to-day did purpose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To end my life with mine own hand. If thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My dear one, lov’st me, canst thou cast me off?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have given my heart to thee; my property</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll also give thee; I will follow thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To every place; each corner of the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were sweet to me with thee; the wildest desert,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believe me, love will change into a garden</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Of pleasures.”</span>
					<span>Thaddeus released himself</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By force from her embrace. “What!” answered he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Art thou in thy right mind? where? and for what?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To follow me? I, but a private soldier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take thee with me, as a <i xml:lang="fr">cantinière</i>?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We will be married,” answered Telimena.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No, never! never!” answered Thaddeus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have no intent at all to marry now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or love. That was but nonsense, let it be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pray thee, love, consider, be at peace!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am grateful to thee, but I cannot wed thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us each other love⁠—but thus⁠—apart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I may no longer tarry; no, no, I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must go. Farewell now, Telimena mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To-morrow I shall go.”</span>
					<span>He spoke, and pressed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hat upon his brows, and turned aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wishing to go, but Telimena stayed him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With glance and visage of Medusa. He</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must tarry ’spite himself, and looked in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon her form; she stood, unbreathing, still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifeless, till she stretched her hand forth like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sword for piercing, with the finger aimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight at the eyes of Thaddeus. “I desired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man!” she cried; “ha! tongue of dragon! ha!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou heart of lizard! Was it nothing, then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I, infatuate with thee, have scorned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Assessor and the Regent, and the Count?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou didst deceive me, and now leav’st forlorn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s nothing, for thou art a man! I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your wickedness! I knew that, like the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou couldst break plighted faith; I did not know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou couldst so basely lie! I listened at</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine uncle’s door. And so this child, Sophia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has pleased thine eyes, and treacherously thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursuest her? Thou scarcely hast deceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One hapless woman, ’neath her very eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou seekest a new victim! Fly, but yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My curse shall overtake thee; or remain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy wickedness I’ll publish to the world!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine arts no others shall deceive, as they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did me deceive! Away! I scorn thee, thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A liar art, a vile man!”</span>
					<span>At this outrage,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deadly to noble’s ears, which no <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had ever heard with patience, Thaddeus shook;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale as a corpse his visage, on the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stamping, and pressing close his lips, he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Thou foolish woman!”</span>
					<span>He departed; still</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This term of “vile” re-echoed in his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the youth shuddered; well he felt that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deserved it, felt that he had done great wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Telimena, that she had with justice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chastised him. Thus to him his conscience spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet more he loathed her for these accusations.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oh, Sophia! he dared not think of her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It caused him shame! Yet this Sophia, so fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sweet, his uncle had to him betrothed her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She should have been his wife, if Satan still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entangling him from sin in fresher sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In falsehood after falsehood, had at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left him with laughter, chidden, scorned by all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had wasted all his future in two days!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! this was the just reward of crime!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In this wild storm of feelings, suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That duel gleamed before him like an anchor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rest. “I’ll slay that villain Count!” he cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In anger; “I will have revenge or die!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But wherefore slay? Himself he could not tell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This rage exceeding, as it had possessed him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in a twinkling did it blow away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again deep grief possessed him, and he thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If true be my surmises that the Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May have some understanding with Sophia⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What then? Perhaps the Count loves Sophy truly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be she loves him, will for husband choose him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What right have I to break such marriage off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself unhappy, others’ bliss destroy?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He fell into despair, and saw no help</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rapid flight, and where? but to the grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So pressing hard his fist upon his brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rushed into the meadows where the ponds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleamed far below, and o’er the muddy pool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood. He plunged his greedy glance into</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The green gulf, and inhaled its muddy odour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pleasure, and he opened wide his lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the pond. For suicide is aye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In choice as delicate as all debauch;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he in the mad whirling of his brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt unexpressed attraction to the mud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To drown himself therein.</span>
					<span>But Telimena,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who from the youth’s wild looks had guessed the depth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his despair, beholding him thus rush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the ponds, though she with anger glowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him, and this justly, she was frightened</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him, she was in truth kind-hearted. Though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She deeply grieved that Thaddeus should dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love another, she would punish him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not destroy. So rushed she after him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclaiming, “Stay! most foolish! Love or not!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marry, or ride away; but only stop!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he in rapid flight outran her far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stood now on the border of the pond.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By strange decree of fate, on this same shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count now rode, with all his jockey troop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the beauty of so fair a night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the wondrous harmony of that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sub-aqueous orchestra, charmed; those choirs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sounded like Eolian harps⁠—no frogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can make such music as the Polish frogs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stayed his horse, and his emprize forgot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned to the pond, he listened curiously.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes roved o’er the fields, and heaven’s wide plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thought composing landscapes of the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The neighbourhood indeed was picturesque,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The two ponds with their visage near approached,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like two fond lovers; waters smooth and clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The right-hand pond presents, like maiden’s cheeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The left-hand pond seemed something darker, like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swarthy visage of a youth, bedecked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already with the down of manhood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glittered with golden sand, like shining locks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The forehead of the second pond with osiers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seemed bristling, and a tuft of willows bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both ponds were garmented in robes of green.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From them two streams, like hands together clasped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gushed forth. The stream of these united fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to the vale; it fell, but was not lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in the darkness of the trench it bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon its waves the gilding of the moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water fell by stages, and on each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone handfuls of the moonlight. In the trench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light was shivered into tiny fragments;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fleeting current caught them, and them bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away into the depths, and from above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again the moonlight still in handfuls fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wouldst have said a Switezianka<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-217" id="noteref-217" epub:type="noteref">217</a> sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the pond, and with one hand did pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The water from a vessel bottomless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While with her other hand she flung, in sport,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Handfuls of gold enchanted, from her lap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Into the water.</span>
					<span>Further, from the trench</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stream escaped meandered o’er the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent, but one might see its current flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For on its moving, trembling surface, bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shimmering moonlight sparkled all its length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the fair Samogitian serpent, called</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="pl">Givoitos</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-218" id="noteref-218" epub:type="noteref">218</a> which, although it seems to sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lying among the heather, crawleth on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it by turns with gold and silver gleams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till sudden from the eye it vanishes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In moss and fern. The stream, meandering thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay hid among the alders, shadowy black</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the horizon’s verge, their forms upraising</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light, scarcely to the eye expressed, like spirits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half on the earth, half in the clouds beheld.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Between the two ponds sat within the trench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mill half-hidden, like an ancient guardian</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spying upon the lovers, listening</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their conversation; seized with anger, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spreads wide his arms, and shaking head and hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth stammer threats. Thus suddenly the mill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now shook his moss-grown brow, and whirled around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His many-fingered fist, loud-clattering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stirred his toothèd wheels; thereby he drowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loving conversation of the ponds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roused the Count from out his reverie.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Count, perceiving Thaddeus had approached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So near his warlike station, cried, “To arms!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seize him!” At once the jockeys sprang to earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere Thaddeus might be well aware what chanced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They captured him. Towards the house they rush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They entered in the courtyard, woke the household;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud barked the dogs, and sentries shouted loud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge half-dressed came forth; he saw a crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men well armed, and thought them robbers, till</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He recognised the Count. “What means all this?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He asked. The Count his sabre brandished o’er him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But seeing him disarmed his rage grew cool.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“<span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>,” said he, “thou eternal foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto my family, I will chastise thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day for recent and for ancient crimes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So do me justice for my fortune’s plunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere I revenge me for my honour’s wrong.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But making sign of cross, the Judge replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In the name of Father and the Son! Sir Count,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fie, fie! are you a robber? Heaven forbid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is this becoming to your noble birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And breeding, and your high rank in the world?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not let myself be wronged!” Just then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up rushed the servants of the Judge, some armed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sticks, with rifles others. Standing far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> gazed with curiosity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Count’s eyes, but in his sleeve concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A knife. Now had begun a fight; the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prevented this, however. ’Twere in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make defence; for newer enemies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrived upon the scene; among the alders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They saw a gleam, the light of rifle shots.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bridge across the stream resounded loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With horses’ hoofs, and “Hey! upon <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand voices cried. The Judge did shudder:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew Gervasy’s signal. “This is nothing,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count said; “more of us will soon be here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surrender, Judge, for these are my allies.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then rushed the Assessor, crying, “I arrest you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In name of his Imperial Majesty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield up your sword, Sir Count, or I will call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For military help; and know you, sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That whoso ventures an assault by night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the twelfth hundred ukase is apprised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That like an evil”⁠—Here, upon his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count with sword-flat struck him, and the Assessor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell stupefied, and in the nettles lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thought he had been wounded, or were dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I see,” the Judge said, “your intent is murder.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All cried aloud. Sophia’s shrieks o’erpowered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The others; clasping close the Judge, she screamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like child transfixed with needles by the Jews.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-219" id="noteref-219" epub:type="noteref">219</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile, among the horses Telimena</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proceeded, and towards the Count outstretched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her clasped hands. “Upon thine honour,” cried she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With piercing voice, with head thrown back, with hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streaming, “By all things holy, we implore thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon our knees! Count, darest thou refuse?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ladies pray thee! Cruel one, thou first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must murder us!” She fell down in a swoon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count sprang forth to help her, much surprised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And somewhat troubled by this scene. “Miss Sophy,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, “and Madam Telimena, ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This sword shall be defiled by guiltless blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>! ye are all my prisoners! Thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did I in Italy, when underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rock the Sicils call Birbante-Rocca,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I captured the intrenchments of the robbers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those armed I slew, commanded to be bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unarmed; they behind our horses went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And decked my glorious triumph; after that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We hanged them at the base of Etna’s mount.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This was a happy chance for the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count, possessing better horses than</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those of the noblemen, and wishing first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To engage the enemy, had left them far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind, and by a mile<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-220" id="noteref-220" epub:type="noteref">220</a> at least outran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their cavalry, and with his jockey train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obedient and used to discipline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had some sort of army regular,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While all those nobles, as insurgents wont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were stormy, and most prompt to hang their foes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count had time to cool from his first rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thought how fitliest he might end the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the need of shedding blood. So then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave commandment to imprison all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The household of <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span> in their house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As prisoners of war, and at their doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He posted sentries.</span>
					<span>Then “Down with <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>!”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose. The nobles in tumultuous crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed in; besieged the mansion, and by storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took it; the easier because the leader</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was captive, and the garrison dispersed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet the victors longed to fight; they sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For foes, and not admitted to the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They ran to the farm buildings, to the kitchen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they the kitchen entered, there the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pots, the fire extinguished scarce, the fresh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Odour of food, the crunching of the dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gnawing the remnants of the supper, took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All hearts, and quickly changed the thoughts of all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It cooled their rage, and kindled need of food.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tired by their march and council all day long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times they cried in concert, “Eat, eat, eat!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Drink! drink!” arose the answer. Thus there were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two choruses, some calling out for food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For drink the others. Loud the uproar still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Re-echoed; where it only reached it caused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All mouths to water, and with hunger moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each one; at signal given from the kitchen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The army all dispersed for foraging.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gervasy, from the Judge’s rooms repulsed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Respecting the Count’s sentinels, must yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perforce. So as he might not there take vengeance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his enemy, he thought upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The expedition’s second great intent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like an experienced man and versed in law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would install the Count all legally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his new heritage, and formally.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> he pursued, and after long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Searching, he spied him hid behind the oven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He collared him, and to the courtyard dragged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to his breast the Penknife holding, said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Count, Sir <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>, ventures to entreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you will deign proclaim forthwith, before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brother nobles, this his intromission</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the castle, and <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>’s mansion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The village, seedlands, fallows; in a word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="la">Cum grovis, woodis, et boundariebus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-221" id="noteref-221" epub:type="noteref">221</a></i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="la">Peasantis, atque rebus omnibus,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="la">Et quibusdam aliis.</i> As thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowest, so bark thou, leave thou nothing out.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sir <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>, wait awhile,” Protasy said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boldly, his hands upon his girdle laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I am ready from all parties to fulfil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commands, but I must warn you that such act,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By violence extorted, will possess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No force in law, proclaimed too in the night.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What violence is there?” said the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>; “here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is no assault. I rather courteously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entreat you. If it seems unto you dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I with my Penknife will a fire upraise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That speedily shall glimmer in your eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though in seven churches.”⁠—“Old Gervasy,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> said, “why makest thou such haste?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am a <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>; it is not my business</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sift the action. It is known to you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A party will bespeak a <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dictate to him the thing they will, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaims it. He is herald of the law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none may chastise heralds. Therefore I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know not why thus you hold me under guard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I presently will write an act; let some one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring me a lantern here. But I meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Proclaim: Be silent, brothers!”</span>
					<span>And to speak</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With greater clearness, mounted he upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty pile of beams, that underneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The orchard hedge were heaped to dry. He climbed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the pile, and all at once, as though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind had blown him off, he from their eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had vanished. ’Mid the cabbages they heard him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They saw among the dark hemp his white cap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flit like a pigeon by. The Bucket fired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereat, but missed his aim. The hop-poles now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to crackle; now Protasy walked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the hops. “I do protest,” he cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Certain of his escape, for him behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bed and marshes of the streamlet lay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>After this protestation, which had sounded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the last cannon shot o’er conquered ramparts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ceased all resistance in <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>’s house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hungry nobles plundering went around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gathered what they might. The Baptist made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His quarters in the cattle-shed, and sprinkled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One ox and two calves on the head. And Razor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had in their throats his sabre buried deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Awl had used with equal diligence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His little sword, and pierced some sucking pigs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the shoulder-blades. Now carnage threatened</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The birds. The watchful geese, who one time saved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rome from the treachery of Gauls, now cackled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain for help. Instead of Manlius,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bucket enters in their roost, he strangles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some of the birds, and to his girdle binds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The others living; vainly, with hoarse throats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The geese cry out; in vain the hissing ganders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nip the invader with their beaks; he forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushes, with down all covered, that in flakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falls, thick as sparks. By motion of their wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne on, as though by wheels, he seemeth <span xml:lang="pl">Chochlik</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The winged evil sprite.</span>
					<span>But fiercer carnage,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although less noisy, ’mid the poultry raged.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Bustard entered in the henhouse; there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounting by ladders, caught with ropes, and drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down from above the cockerels, crested hens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tufted; strangled each one after each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threw them in a heap. Most lovely birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nourished on pearly groats! O heedless Bustard!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What impulse thus did urge thee? Nevermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will prayers of thine appease Sophia’s wrath.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gervasy now remembered former times.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ordered kontusz girdles to be brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereby from <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>’s cellar drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Casks of old spirits, liquors, and of beer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew the bungs from some, the others seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noblemen; with ready will, as thick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ants, they roll them to the castle; there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whole crowd gather for the night; the Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Has there made his headquarters.</span>
					<span>They now lay</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred fires, they boil, they roast, they fry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tables bend beneath the load of meat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drink flows in rivers. All the noblemen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would eat, and drink, and sing this whole night through;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But gradually they began to sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yawn; eye is extinguished after eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the assembly nods; each where he sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falls down; the one falls with a dish, the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over a kettle, one by a beef quarter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus sleep, death’s brother, has the victors vanquished.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
