<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book I: Home-Keeping</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Home-Keeping</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Return of a young gentleman⁠—A first meeting in a chamber, a second at table⁠—Valuable instructions of the Judge concerning politeness⁠—The <span xml:lang="pl">Podkomorzy</span>’s political views on fashions⁠—The beginning of the quarrel of Kusy and Sokol⁠—The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s sorrow⁠—The last <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> of the tribunal⁠—A glance over the contemporary political situation in Lithuania and Europe.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Litva! my country, like art thou to health,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For how to prize thee he alone can tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who has lost thee. I behold thy beauty now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In full adornment, and I sing of it</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Because I long for thee.</span>
					<span>O holy Virgin!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, who defendest <span xml:lang="pl">Czenstochowa</span> bright,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shinest in the Ostra Gate, who shieldest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The castled town of <span xml:lang="pl">Nowogrodek</span> with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its faithful people; as by miracle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou didst restore me as a child to health,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When by a weeping mother, I, confided</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy protection, raised my half-dead eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the threshold of thy sanctuary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could go at once on foot to offer thanks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To God for life returned;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> do thou likewise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restore us thus by miracle unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bosom of our Fatherland! Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear thou my soul, consumed by longing, to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those wooded hills, unto those meadows green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad stretching on the azure Niemen’s shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards those fields, rich hued with various grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden with wheat, and silvered with the rye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where amber rape, where buckwheat white as snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where with a maiden blush the clover glows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all, as with a ribbon girdled by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A green ridge, whereon pear-trees far apart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid such fields, years since, upon the brink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of running water, on a hill not high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among a birchen thicket; framed of wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There stood a noble’s mansion, underbuilt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With masonry; the whitened walls gleamed far;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whiter from the contrast they appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the dark-green poplar tree that shielded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house from blasts of autumn. ’Twas not large,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dwelling-house, but all round neat and clean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It had a great barn, and three stacks beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of garnered corn, that underneath the thatch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not be placed. ’Twas seen the region round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was rich in corn, and from the corn-stooks thick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As stars, appearing all their length and breadth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the clearings: from the many ploughs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those dark-green fallows turning up thus soon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which to the mansion surely appertained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas seen that order and abundance reigned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within this house. The gate half open stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaiming unto all who travelled by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its hospitality, inviting all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This very moment, in a two-horse chaise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A youthful gentleman approached the gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And traversing the courtyard came before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallery. He lighted from the chaise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horses, left there, ’gan to nip the grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the door, at leisure. Empty seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house; the doors were locked and fastened close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bolts and padlock. But the traveller</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran not unto the farm to call for servants;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But oped the door, and ran into the house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He longed to welcome it, since he for long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not beheld his home. For in the city</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off for education he had stayed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The end long waited for had come at last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ran within, and eagerly he gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tenderly, upon those ancient walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As old acquaintances. He viewed again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The self-same furniture, same tapestry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With which he loved to play from swaddling-bands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But less of size it seemed, less beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than formerly. And those same portraits hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the walls. There <span xml:lang="pl">Kosciuszko</span>, clad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Cracovian <i xml:lang="pl">czamara</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes to heaven, and grasped a two-hand sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as when, on the altar-steps, he swore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He with this sword would drive the despots three</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Poland, or himself upon it fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And further <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a> sat, in Polish dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grieving for freedom lost; he grasped a knife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blade towards his breast; before him lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phaedo and Cato’s life. Jasinski<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A beautiful and sadly-looking youth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside him Korsak, his unsevered friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stand on Praga’s ramparts, over piles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Muscovites, the foemen cutting down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Praga burned already round them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> Even</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ancient clock with chimes the traveller knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wooden case, at the entrance of the alcove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a childish joy he pulled the string</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear again <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span>’s old mazurka.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He ran through all the house, and sought that room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where as a child he dwelt, long years ago;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entered⁠—retired; his wondering glances flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the walls; a woman’s dwelling here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose was it? His old uncle was unmarried.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Petersburg for years had dwelt his aunt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas not the housekeeper’s. A piano here:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon it books and music: strewn about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without or heed or care⁠—a sweet disorder.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were not ancient hands that strewed them so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white frock here, late taken from a peg</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To indue, unfolded on a chair arm lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the window pots of perfumed flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Geraniums, asters, wallflowers, violets.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in one window stood the traveller.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New wonder! on a border once o’ergrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With nettles, in the orchard, he beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little garden crossed by garden walks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All filled with flowers, with English grass and mint;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wooden paling, with initials wreathed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleamed with a hundredfold of ribbons gay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beds, ’twas seen, were freshly watered; near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There stood tin vessels full of water. Still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pretty gardener nowhere might be seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though she had passed but lately. Still the bushes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were rocking to and fro, as lately stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And near the trees a little foot’s light print</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the sand, shoeless and stockingless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the light dry sand, as white as snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An imprint plainly marked, but light; no doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left in swift running by the tiny foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one, who hardly even touched the earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long in the window stood the traveller</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking and dreaming: drinking in sweet breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of flowers, he bent his visage downward to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The violet plants; with curious eyes pursued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tiny footprints on the path, and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more he fixed them, thought of them and whose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were;⁠—he had guessed. By chance he raised his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the garden wall, behold there stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A young girl. Her white garment only hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her slender figure o’er the bosom, leaving</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unveiled her shoulders and her swan-like neck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such dress a Lithuanian woman wears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the morning, and in such is never seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By men. So though she had none there to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She laid her hands upon her bosom, thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A veil supplying to the little frock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not loose in curls her locks, but twisted round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In little knots, and hidden from the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In white and tiny husks, that wondrously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adorned the head; for in the sun’s bright rays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They shone as shines the glory on a saint.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her face was seen not. Turned unto the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She looked for some one, far below. She saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laughed, and clapped her hands; then from the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She flew like a white bird, and glided o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The garden, over beds and over flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on a plank against the chamber-wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the traveller marked it, through the window</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She darted, shining, sudden, silent, light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a moonbeam. Singing, she caught up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The frock, and ran towards the mirror. Then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She first perceived the youth, and from her hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The garment fell, and pale she grew with fright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wonder. And the traveller’s countenance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glowed with a rosy colour, like a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which meets the morning dawn. The modest youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half shut his eyes and screened them. He endeavoured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak, entreat her pardon; but he only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could bow and then retire. The maiden shrieked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmeaningly, like children scared in sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The traveller looked alarmed, but she was gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He left the room confused, and felt his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud-beating; and himself he scarcely knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If this fantastic meeting should amuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Or shame him, or rejoice him.</span>
					<span>But meanwhile</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It ’scaped not heed upon the farm, that now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some new guest to the gallery had driven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horses to their stable had been led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fed with plenty, as there was abundance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this well-ordered house of hay and fodder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For never would the Judge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a> by following</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New fashions, send the horses of his guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the Jews who kept the inn. The servants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had come not forth to welcome, but think not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the Judge’s house was careless service;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servants wait till the <span xml:lang="pl">Pan Wojski</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who ordered supper now behind the house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The master’s place he holds, and in his absence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself receives and welcometh all guests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A distant kinsman being, and household friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On seeing a guest, he hastened to the farm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unseen, because he would not come to meet him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In cloth undress; so quickly as he might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He put his Sunday dress on; ready since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The morning, for he from the morning knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He should with many guests sit down to supper.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> recognised the traveller</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off, outspread his arms, and with a cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embraced and kissed him. Then began that rapid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confused discourse, wherein we strive to enclose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The events of many years in few short words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And precious, in the course of stories, questions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of exclamations, sighs, and fresh salutings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the <span xml:lang="pl">Pan Wojski</span> had inquired enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough had learned, he at the end of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The annals of this very day relates.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Tis well, my Thaddeus,”⁠—for such the name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Kosciuszko</span>’s name, by which the youth was called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As sign that in the war-time<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> he was born⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis well, my Thaddeus, thou cam’st home to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While we have so many fair young ladies here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine uncle thinks to make a wedding for thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is good choice at hand; much company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is gathered here some days since for the judgment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of frontier, to conclude that quarrel with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count. The Count himself comes here to-morrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a> already is arrived,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wife and daughters. With their guns the youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have sought the forest; but the old men and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The women watch the reapers, near the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there await the coming of the youths.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll go there, if thou wilt, and shortly we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall meet thine uncle and the Chamberlain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His family,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> and all the honoured ladies.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> went with Thaddeus by the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still they could not talk out all their fill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun had reached the last degrees of heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Less strong his blaze, yet broader than at noon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All redly shining, like the hearty face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a husbandman, whose labour in the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is done, when he returneth home for rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The radiant round already sank upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The summits of the pine-trees, and already</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The misty twilight filled their crowns and boughs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bound in one the forest all, commingling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black grew the thicket like a mighty building,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun above like red fire on the roof.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then in the depth he fell, between the trunks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still gleaming like a candle through the crannies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shutters, and extinguished was. Forthwith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sickles clashing in the corn, and rakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the meadow silent were, and stayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so the Judge commands: with day for him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The labourer’s toils were over. The world’s Lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth know the length of time for man to work;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the sun, his workman, leaves the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time ’tis earth’s labourer too should leave the field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus used the Judge to say; the Judge’s will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was sacred to the honest overseer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ev’n the wagons, wherein they but now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to lade the rye, half full set off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the barn; the oxen did rejoice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel such light and unaccustomed load.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now from the wood came all the company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joyful but yet in order. First the children</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came with their tutor; next the Judge, with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lady of the Chamberlain; beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain with all his family.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The girls went close behind the elder women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youths beside the maidens, but these went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the young men by some half-a-step.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus decency commands. None held discourse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of precedence, none ranked the men and women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But each kept order due despite himself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in his house the Judge old customs kept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never suffered any lack respect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For age, for office, birth, or intellect.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis by such order, said he, houses flourish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nations; by its fall they come to ruin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The household and the servants thus were used</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To order, and the guest but lately come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kinsman or stranger, all who visited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge, received those customs, whereof all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Around was redolent.</span>
					<span>Short welcoming</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge had for his nephew, gave to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With dignity his hand to kiss, and health</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wished unto him, with kiss upon his brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But though he spoke but little with him then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that respect he owed his guests, the tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with his garment’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> hem he quickly dried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Showed well how he loved Master Thaddeus.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And in the master’s traces everything</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From forest and from pasture, mead and grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forthwith returned. A bleating flock of sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in the lane together hustling, raised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloud of dust. And further onward strode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A herd of Tyrol calves, with brazen bells;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There neighing horses from the new-mown mead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew; all together ran unto the well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose wooden arm did forthwith creak, and pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stream of water in a wooden trough.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Judge, though tired, though with company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Missed not a farmer’s weighty duties. He</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself betook him to the well. For best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At eventide the master may review</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The state of his live stock; nor left he e’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This overlooking to his servants; well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge knew “master’s eye makes fat the horse.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, with Protasius the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Await with lights within the hall; they stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conversing, and somewhat at variance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For while as yet the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> stayed away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> secretly had given orders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring the supper-tables from the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swiftly as might be to set them up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In midmost of an ancient castle hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ruins might be seen beyond the forest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But why these changes? the <span xml:lang="pl">Pan Wojski</span> frowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And asked the Judge’s pardon; much the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did marvel; but ’twas so; the hour was late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And change were difficult; he would entreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pardon of his guests, and lead them to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The desert place. The <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> on the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfolded to the Judge the cause which led him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To misconstrue his will. Within the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was no room which could a space supply</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For guests so many or so honourable.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The castle had a great hall, yet preserved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roof was whole; one wall indeed had fallen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The windows had no panes; but this in summer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was of no moment; and the cellars’ nearness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was for the servants a convenience great.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While saying this he winked unto the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by his mien disclosed his mind concealed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Yet weightier causes.</span>
					<span>Some two thousand paces</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A castle stood beyond the house. It was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stately structure, by its mass imposing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In former times it was the heritage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos’</span> ancient race. Deceased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its last possessor in intestine wars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The estates, by sequestration half destroyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the trustees’ neglect, and law-decrees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In part had fallen unto distant kinsmen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By spindle side, the rest to creditors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been divided. None would take the castle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twere hard to spare the cost of maintenance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In noble state. But yet these old walls pleased</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youthful Count, a neighbour near, who when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He passed from tutelage, and late was come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From travel, said they were of Gothic structure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although the Judge made sure from documents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The architect a master was from <span xml:lang="pl">Wilna</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not a Goth at all. It was enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count desired the Castle; and the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did suddenly conceive the same desire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None knew the reason. So began a suit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the local, then the central court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then in the Senate, local court again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And governor’s tribunal. And at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After great cost and many ukases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This action to the local courts returned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Well had the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> said that in this hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guests invited, and a court of law</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alike might find a place. The hall was great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a refectory; its arch swelled high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised upon pillars; paved the floor with stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The walls were unadorned, but smooth and clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The horns of roes and stags were ranged around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With legends, showing where these spoils were ta’en;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each with its proper name stood there inscribed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the arched roof gleamed <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>’s crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span><i xml:lang="pl">Polkozic</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
					<span>All the guests in order came,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a circle stood. The Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At table took the highest seat; this place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was his by right of dignity and years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In going there he to the ladies bowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old men, and the youths. Beside him stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A begging friar, beside the friar the Judge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bernardine in Latin spoke short grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then brandy to the men was given; all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forthwith were seated, and in silence ate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Litvin <i xml:lang="pl">cholodziec</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a> with appetite.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though young, by right of guest Thaddeus sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside his uncle, and among the ladies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between him and his uncle there remained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An empty place, that seemed to wait its guest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The uncle glanced at it, and at the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As sure of some one’s coming and desirous;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thaddeus followed too his uncle’s glance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange thing: the places round were seats of maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All highly born, and each one young and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Thaddeus gazed on that where none appeared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This place a riddle was; young men love riddles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Absent in thought, to the <span xml:lang="pl">Podkomorzanka</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lovely neighbour, scarce few words he said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor changed her plates, nor filled her glass with wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor e’er with courteous speeches entertained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ladies, whereby they might recognise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His city breeding. But this empty place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone had power to charm him; not now void:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had filled it with his thoughts; around this place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand guesses ran, as after rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frogs on a lonely meadow; ’mid them queens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One solitary figure, as in sunshine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lily of the lake her white brow lifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Above the waters.</span>
					<span>Now the third course came.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the Chamberlain a drop of wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outpouring into Mistress Rosa’s glass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pushing to his younger daughter’s hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A plate of cucumbers, thus said, “ ’Tis I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself must serve you, daughters mine, although</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am but old and clumsy.” Hearing this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some youths from table sprang, and served the ladies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge a side glance cast at Thaddeus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And setting right the cuffs of his <i xml:lang="pl">kontusz</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured out the wine of Hungary, and said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To-day, by our new custom, we send out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our youth to study in the capital;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not grudging they should have more lore from books</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than had their elders, but I see each day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How much from this young men are suffering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For lack of schools to teach our youth to live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With men, and in the world. In former times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young nobles went unto the courts of lords.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself a <span xml:lang="pl">Wojewode</span>’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a> courtier was ten years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father of our gracious Chamberlain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This saying, he pressed his friend upon the knee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“His counsels formed me for the public service,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His favour left me not till made a man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my house ever be his memory dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each day I pray the Lord God for his soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If in his court so much I did not profit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As others, worthier of the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojewode</span>’s grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who after reached the country’s highest places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At least I reaped this profit; in my house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None can reproach me, that I ever fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In honour or in courtesy to any;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this I boldly say, that courtesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not an easy, nor a little thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not easy, for ’tis not comprised in this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deftly lift a leg, or to salute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No matter whom with smiles. Such modish court’sy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seems merchant-like to me, but not Old Polish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor noble. Courtesy belongs to all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But unto each another sort. For not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devoid of courtesy is children’s love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor for his wife attentions of a husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor of a master for his servants; still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is in each a certain difference;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And long a man must study not to err,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give to each the honour that is due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our elders learned it from discourse of lords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The living history of the country, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mid noblemen the annals of the district.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereby a nobleman might show his brother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All knew him well, and did not lightly prize him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So nobles held their manners under guard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask not a man to-day, Who is he? Who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has been his father? With whom has he lived?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What are his deeds? Each enters where he will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he is not a governmental spy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not in poverty. As once Vespasian</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sniffed not at money, and would not inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence came it, from what hands, and from what country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So men ask not a man’s race, or his customs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough he seems important, and they view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stamp upon him; so they prize their friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As Jews do money.”</span>
					<span>Saying this, the Judge</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked round in order on his guests, for though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ever spake with fluency and judgment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew young folks impatient now-a-days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that long speeches, though most eloquent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do weary them. But all in silence heard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge seemed with the Chamberlain to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Counsel by glance of eye; the Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would not by praising interrupt, though oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assenting by a nod. The Judge was silent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friend still gave assent by beckoning.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge filled up his goblet and his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then continued: “Courtesy is not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little thing; for when a man has learned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To estimate as is becoming birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Age, virtues, customs in all others, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perceiveth then his own weight; as on scales</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we would know our own, we first must lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some other weight upon the opposing scale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, gentlemen, now of your special heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The courtesy is worthy, which young men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do to the fair sex owe, especially</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When houses’ greatness, fortune’s bounties more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light up the charms and virtues nature gave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence is the way to love, and marriage thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magnificent allier of houses. Thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our elders thought, and therefore”⁠—Here the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sudden turn of head to Thaddeus signed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threw a severe glance at him; as a sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he had reached the moral of his speech.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Chamberlain his golden snuff-box tapped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said, “Good Judge, at one time ’twas far worse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I do not know if we are changed by fashion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We elder men, or if young men are better,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now I see far less degeneracy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I recollect the time, alas! when to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Fatherland French manners entered first.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When petty, foreign gentlemen, on sudden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From stranger lands invaded us in hordes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worse than the Nogaj Tartars,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a> persecuting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God in their country, their forefathers’ faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their customs, laws, and even their ancient dress.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas pitiful to see these dried-up youngsters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Talking through noses, oft without their noses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In brochures learnèd, and in the gazettes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaiming new beliefs, toilettes, and laws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This rabble had great power upon men’s minds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when the Lord God lets chastisement loose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er nations, he bereaves them first of sense.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so the wisest dared not beard the fops;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the nation feared them like the plague,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling disease’s germ within ev’n then.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cried against the fashionable fops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But took their pattern by them; changed their faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their speech, their laws, their dress; it was indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A masquerade, a carnival of license,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which a great fast followed⁠—slavery.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I recollect, although but then a child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When to my father’s house in <span xml:lang="pl">Oszmiana</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a French chariot the <span xml:lang="pl">Podczaszyc</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a> came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first in Litva who wore French costume,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all pursued him as small birds a kite.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The houses envied were, before whose threshold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The two-horse chaise in which he rode stood still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which in the French tongue they called <i xml:lang="fr">cariole</i>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of lackeys sat two dogs behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the box a great and ugly German,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thin as a plank, with long lean legs like hop-poles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In stockings clad, and slippers silver-clasped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wig with queue tied up into a bag.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing this equipage, the old men snorted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With laughter, and the peasants signed the cross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said that there was riding o’er the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Venice devil in a German car.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the <span xml:lang="pl">Podczaszyc</span> was ’twere long to tell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough to us he seemed an ape or parrot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a great peruke, that he loved to liken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He to the golden fleece⁠—we to the plica.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>If any one then felt our Polish dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was handsomer than aping foreign modes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He dared not say so, lest the young men should</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cry out against it that it hindered culture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It kept back progress, ’twas a treacherous thing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such was the power of that time’s prejudice.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Said the <span xml:lang="pl">Podczaszyc</span> that to reformate us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d civilize and constitutionise us.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He announced to us some Frenchmen eloquent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had a discovery made, that men are equal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though in the law divine this long was writ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every priest from pulpit said the same.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old was that knowledge; its fulfilment now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concerned us; but at that time reigned such blindness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That none believed the world’s most ancient things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless they read them in a French gazette.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despite equality, he took the title</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Marquis; it is known that titles come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Paris, and at that time there the title</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Marquis was in fashion. So at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon as the fashion changed, this Marquis took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Title of Democrat; at length with change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fashion, when Napoleon reigned, the Democrat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrived from Paris as a Baron. Had he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lived longer, with some other alteration,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had rebaptized himself a Democrat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Paris glories in repeated change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fashion, and in what the French invent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The Pole delights.</span>
					<span>“Praise be to God that now</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If our young men beyond the frontier pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis not to seek for dress, or legislation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shops of booksellers, or eloquence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To learn in Paris cafés. For Napoleon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A prudent man and prompt, allows no time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To study fashions, or to chatter. Now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sword resounds, and in us old men swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our hearts that once again the world is loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With glory of the Poles. Now is there glory;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will be therefore a Republic: since</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From laurels ever blossoms Freedom’s tree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only ’tis sad, so many years drag on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For us, in idleness, and they still far!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So long to wait; even news so seldom comes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father Robak”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a>⁠—in a lower tone he spoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the Bernardine⁠—“I heard that you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have news from that side Niemen; and perhaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your reverence knows something of our army?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No, nothing,” careless seeming answer made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bernardine; “I like not politics.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I at times from Warsaw have a letter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is of things that but concern our Order,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Bernardine affairs, and wherefore talk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of these at supper; all are laymen here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom such affairs in no wise can concern.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This saying, he looked askance where ’mid the feasters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There sat one Russian guest, a <span xml:lang="pl">Captain Rykow</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ancient soldier, in the village near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had been quartered. Him through courtesy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge had asked to supper. <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> ate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With appetite, scarce mingling in discourse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when they spoke of Warsaw, he rejoined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raising his head: “Fie! fie! Sir Chamberlain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are ever anxious about Bonaparte,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Always on Warsaw! what! your Fatherland!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am no spy, yet understand I Polish.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Country! I feel all that! I understand it!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are Poles, a Russian I; but now we fight not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s now an armistice: we eat and drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together. Often on our outer posts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We chat with Frenchmen; and we drink our <i xml:lang="pl">wódka</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together⁠—now hurrah! and cannons sound!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Russian proverb says: ‘With whom I fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love him.’⁠—‘Love your wife like to your soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beat her like your <i xml:lang="pl">szuba</i>.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a> I say we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall have a war. For Major Plut’s arrived;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The adjutant of staff came yesterday,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With orders to prepare to march. We march;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis either on the Turks, or on the French.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Bonaparte! perhaps he may out-trump us;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without <span xml:lang="pl">Suwarow</span>. In our regiment they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell how as we were marching on the trench,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Bonaparte used sorceries:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> well then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suwarow, too, used magic; so it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sorcery pitted against sorcery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One day in fight⁠—wherever was he gone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sought for Bonaparte; he had changed himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a fox, and so <span xml:lang="pl">Suwarow</span> turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself into a greyhound; Bonaparte</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again did change himself into a cat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So on to tear each other with their claws!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suwarow changed into an ass. Now you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall see what later came to Bonaparte.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> broke off, and ate: then came a servant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In with the fourth course, and the side doors oped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a new person entered, young and fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her sudden coming, stature, and her beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dress turned every eye: all welcomed her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed, excepting Thaddeus, all knew her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A slender shape was hers, and beautiful;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gown of a rich stuff, a rosy silk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The neck cut low, lace collar, and short sleeves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She twirled within her hand a fan⁠—for pastime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since ’twas not hot⁠—she waved the gilded fan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scattered round a plenteous rain of sparks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her locks were wreathed in twisted braids and curls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rosy ribbons intertwined; among them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A brilliant, nearly hidden from the eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone like a star among a comet’s tresses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was a gala dress, and not a few</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whispered it was too fine for country life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for a working day. The eye perceived not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her little feet, although the robe was short</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For very fast she ran, or rather glided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like those small figures, which upon the feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Three Kings boys push along on skates.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She ran, and with light court’sy welcomed each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endeavouring to reach her destined place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas hard, for chairs were placed not for the guests;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon four benches in four rows they sat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The row must either move, or bench be crossed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She glided cleverly between two benches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then between those sitting and the table</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She spun around most like a billiard-ball.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In running past, she touched our young man close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her flounce entangling over some one’s knee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She slipped a little, and in this divergence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She leaned upon the arm of Thaddeus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She courteously asked pardon, and sat down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between him and his uncle, but ate nought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She only fanned herself, and twirled the fan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now set to rights her Flanders lace, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the light touching of her hand caressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her curls of hair, and knots of ribbons bright.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas just four minutes this distraction reigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meanwhile at the table’s further end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First stilly murmurs were; at length began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A half-aloud discourse; the men related</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day’s chase. The Assessor with the Regent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contested obstinately, ever louder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quarrel of a certain crop-tailed greyhound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In whose possession the Pan Regent gloried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And held that he to-day had seized the hare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the Assessor proved in his despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This glory ’longed unto his greyhound Sokol.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>They asked of others sentence; so all round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took either Kusy’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a> part, or that of Sokol,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As connoisseurs, or else as witnesses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the other end the Judge to his new neighbour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said in a whisper: “I am very sorry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We had to sit down, ’twas impossible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To put the supper off to any later.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guests were hungry; they’ve been far afield.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This said, he with the Chamberlain discoursed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of politics, in low tones, o’er the goblet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While thus both table-sides were occupied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thaddeus gazed long upon the fair unknown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He recollected now at the first glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the place he from the first had guessed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose seat it was to be; he blushed, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart with unaccustomed violence beat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So all his secret riddles thus were solved!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So thus it was appointed, at his side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should sit that loveliness in twilight seen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas true she now appeared of larger growth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In full dress, dress both magnifies and lessens.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But why had one short locks and golden bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other wreaths of long and raven braids?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bright hue from the sunbeams was derived;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunset renders all things crimson bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had not see her face, she fled too soon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thought evolves by guessing a fair face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought she surely must have had black eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pale face, lips as red as cherries twin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since here he saw such eyes, and lips and cheeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In age perhaps was greatest difference;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gardening nymph had seemed a little maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This lady was a woman grown in years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But youth for beauty’s birth certificate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth never ask; all women to young men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seem young, to boys each beauty doth appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their own age, and to the innocent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will every one beloved appear a maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Thaddeus numbered well-nigh twenty years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had from childhood dwelt in <span xml:lang="pl">Wilna</span>’s town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had a priest as tutor, who restrained him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In strictest bonds of ancient discipline.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Thaddeus from his parents had derived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pure heart, lively spirit, innocent soul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet of wilfulness had not a little.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He made a plan, at last he would enjoy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His long forbidden freedom, in the country.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew himself right handsome, strong and young;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vigour and health he owned as heritage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His name <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a> the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span> all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well is known are valiant, stout and strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First-rate as soldiers, but less skilled in learning.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor from his fathers Thaddeus was degenerate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rode on horse right well, walked far on foot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although not dull, in study little versed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though spared his uncle for his training nought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he preferred to shoot, or wield the sabre.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew they meant to fit him for the wars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so his father’s testament ordained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He longed unceasing for the drum while yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In school. But all at once his uncle changed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those first intentions, ordered him to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeward, and marry and to take up farming.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He promised he would give him to begin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little village,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a> later all his lands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And all these virtues, all these qualities</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Thaddeus drew that heedful woman’s eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His neighbour. Closely did she scan his tall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shapely form, strong arms, broad chest, and looked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his visage, which a blush suffused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft as the young man met her eyes; for now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his first shyness he was quite restored;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gazed with bolder glance, wherein burned fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And likewise she gazed, so the four eyes burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards each other, bright as Advent candles.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She first began discourse with him in French:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came from town, from school, so of new books,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of authors, his opinion she inquired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from such sentence led new questions on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when of painting she began to speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of music, drawing, and of sculpture even,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She seemed alike acquainted with the pencil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With music and with books, till Thaddeus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At so much learning felt quite mystified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stammered like a boy before his master.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the schoolmaster happily was pretty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not severe; his neighbour guessed his trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so began anew on other things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Easier and not so learnèd; country life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its dullness and vexations; how one must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divert one self, and how divide the time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make life merrier and the country gay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Thaddeus answered with more boldness; then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thing went further, and in half an hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They grew quite confidential, trifling jests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began, and little quarrels in the end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She placed before him three small pills of bread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three persons at his choice; he took the first;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At which the daughters of the Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both frowned; his neighbour laughed, but did not say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who ’twas that lucky pellet signified.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At far end of the board was other talk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there, on sudden reinforced, the party</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Sokol pressed the partisans of Kusy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without compunction; high the quarrel rose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They ate not of the latest dishes now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both sides disputed, standing up and drinking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Regent bristled like an angry woodcock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once he began, he pleaded well his cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unbrokenly, and pointed it with gestures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expressively. The Pan Regent Bolesta</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was once an advocate, and called the Preacher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because he loved such gestures overmuch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now by his side his hands lay, and his elbows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bent backward; underneath his arms his fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And long nails put he forward; by this image</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two greyhound leashes he presented. Thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His theme he ended: “I and the Assessor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each side by side, resembling triggers twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stirred by one finger on the self-same gun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘<i xml:lang="pl">Vytcha!</i>’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a> they went, and started off the hare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight for the plain. The dogs here”⁠—Saying this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew his hand along the board, with fingers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He showed a greyhound’s motions wondrously.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—“The dogs here.⁠—From the wood a piece divides them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sokol straight forward, fine dog! but too rash,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Got before Kusy, how much? by a finger.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew he’d miss! the hare was game enough!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He made straight for the plain⁠—the pack right after.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hare was game! As soon as he got wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the greyhound pack, he doubled right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A caper! After him the stupid dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed to right, again to right he doubled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cut two capers, dogs again to left!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He in the wood; my Kusy’s up with him!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus shouting, bent the Regent o’er the table,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran with his fingers to the other side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shouted, “Up with him!” near Thaddeus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thaddeus and his fair neighbour, sudden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By such a burst of voice right in the midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their conversing startled, quickly drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their heads back from each other, like two treetops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together bound, when storm winds break them loose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their two hands that near each other lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the table, suddenly drew back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one blush did their faces twain suffuse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not to betray confusion Thaddeus said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Most true, Sir Regent, true without a doubt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your Kusy is a fine dog by his shape;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if as good at taking”⁠—“Good!” exclaimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Regent; “what! my favourite dog? how should he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not be a good one?” Thaddeus again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoiced so good a dog had no defect.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regretted that he saw him but in passing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving the forest, so he had no time</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To observe his good points.</span>
					<span>At this the Assessor</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembled, and dropped his goblet, fixed a look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like basilisk on Thaddeus. Far less loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He than the Regent was, and far less restless;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More spare of form, in stature smaller; he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was terrible at ball, redoubt, and <i xml:lang="pl">sejmik</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For of him it was said he bore a sting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his tongue; his skill was to compose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such witty jests that one might print them in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The almanac, malicious all and sharp.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rich man once, his father’s heritage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brother’s fortune he had wasted all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make a figure in the world, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had entered service of the Government,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be of some importance in the district.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much loved he hunting, for its joys in part;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Also that sound of horns and sight of toils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recalled his youthful years when he maintained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A many huntsmen and renownèd dogs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the whole kennel but two greyhounds now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remained, and yet of that one they denied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glory! Near he drew, and leisurely</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His favourite stroking, answered with a smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’twas a venomed smile: “A tailless greyhound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is like a nobleman without an office.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Likewise the tail much helps the dog in running:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You, sir, a crop-tail hold as proof of goodness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll ask your aunt’s opinion for the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Mistress Telimena long has dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the city, and not long ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came here, she better understands the chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than do our sporting youths; with years alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arriveth any learning of this sort.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thaddeus, on whom this thunderbolt had fallen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose confused, and nothing said awhile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But looked with rage increasing on his rival.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just then, most happily, the Chamberlain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times did sneeze. “<i xml:lang="pl">Vivat!</i>” cried all; he bowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all, and on his golden snuff-box tapped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden snuff-box, all with diamonds set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In midst the portrait of <span xml:lang="pl">King Stanislas</span>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king himself had given it unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father of the Chamberlain; the son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After his father held it worthily.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when he tapped upon it, ’twas a sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he craved hearing. All at once were still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ventured not to ope their lips. He said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Most Powerful Nobles, Brothers, Benefactors,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The meads and forests are the hunter’s forum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in the house I cannot judge such cause;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And till to-morrow I adjourn this court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no appeal will I allow to-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>, call thou the action for to-morrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the plain. The Count comes here to-morrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all his hunting train, and you will go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With us, my neighbour, Judge, and all the ladies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Mistress Telimena. In a word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll make a grand hunt ex officio.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> too will not his company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refuse us.” Saying this to the old man</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His snuff-box he presented.</span>
					<span>’Mid the hunters</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> at the table’s lower end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was sitting, listening with half-shut eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not a word he spoke, although the youths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From time to time demanded his opinion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For none knew hunting better than did he.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He still kept silence, while the pinch of snuff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He weighed between his fingers, meditating</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long, ere at length he tasted of the pinch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sneezed till all the room re-echoed loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shook his head, and said with bitter smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Oh! how this saddens and amazes me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old man! what had said our elder hunters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see, in such a noble company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among so many gentlemen, disputes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be adjusted, of a greyhound’s tail?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What would old <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span> say, could he revive?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would return to <span xml:lang="pl">Lachowicz</span> and lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down in his grave again. What would the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojewode</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old <span xml:lang="pl">Niesiolowski</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a> say, who hitherto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth own the finest bloodhounds in the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after lordly custom doth maintain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two hundred huntsmen, and within his castle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of <span xml:lang="pl">Woroncza</span> some hundred wagon-loads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of nets possesses? But these many years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He keepeth like a monk within his home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None may prevail on him to join the chase.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would refuse ev’n <span xml:lang="pl">Bialopiotrowicz</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fine glory ’twere for such a lord to ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A-hunting after this new present fashion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my time, sir, in hunters’ language, boars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bears, elks, and wolves were called noble game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beasts that had not tusks, or horns, or claws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were left for hired servants, or court menials.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No gentleman would take into his hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rifle, to disgrace it in such sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By pouring small shot in it. True, they did</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep greyhounds, since in coming from the chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It well may happen, from the horses’ hoofs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wretched hare may start. Then let they loose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greyhounds on’t for pastime, and the boys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On ponies mounted did pursue the game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before their parents’ eyes, who scarcely deigned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look upon these sports, far less dispute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About them. Therefore let the Illustrious</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most Powerful Chamberlain now condescend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To draw back his commands, and pardon me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in such hunt I cannot ride; for ne’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My foot therein shall stir. My name’s <span xml:lang="pl">Hreczecha</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And since the days of King Lech<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a> no <span xml:lang="pl">Hreczecha</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did ever go a-riding after hares.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The laughter of the young men here did drown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s speech. All now from table rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain the first, this precedence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him belonging from his years and office.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He passed, to ladies, old men, young men bowing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind him went the Friar; the Judge beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge upon the threshold gave his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the <span xml:lang="pl">Podkomorzyna</span>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a> Thaddeus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Telimena; the Assessor to</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Krajczanka</span>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a> and the Regent came behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading <span xml:lang="pl">Hreczanka</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a> daughter of the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Towards the barn proceeded Thaddeus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With some among the guests; he felt confused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ill at ease, unjoyful; he in thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discussed that day’s events; the meeting, supper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside that lovely neighbour; but the most</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Especially that one word “aunt” did buzz</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a tiresome fly around his ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He longed to ask the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> at more length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concerning Mistress Telimena, but</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not empannel him. Nor did he see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, for at once with supper done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All of the household went behind the guests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As fitting is to servants, to assign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rooms in the house for sleeping. The old men</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And ladies slept within the mansion.</span>
					<span>Thaddeus</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received command to lead the younger men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the barn to rest upon the hay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In half-an-hour, it was as still throughout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mansion, as within a convent when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayers have been sung; the silence only broken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the night sentry’s voice. The Judge alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed not his eyes; to-morrow’s expedition</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must ordain, and coming entertainment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must plan within the house. He gave command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bailiffs, overseers, to barn keepers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To writers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a> to the housekeeper and huntsmen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stablemen; and all that day’s accounts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must o’erlook. At last unto the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said he would undress. The <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unloosed his girdle, ’twas a Slucko belt,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A massy girdle, gleaming with thick tassels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like plumy crests; on one side gold brocade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With purple flowers, black silk on the reverse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With silver lattice work; a belt like this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May readily be donned on either side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The golden on a gala-day, the black</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For mourning. And the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> only knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to unloose this belt, or fold it on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now busy with this task, he thus did talk:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How did I ill, that I transferred the tables</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the old castle? none will lose thereby;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you, sir, may the gainer be. The suit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concerns this castle; we have gained this day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A right unto the castle, and despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eagerness the other party shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I now can prove, that we are in possession.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he, who to a castle guests invites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To supper, proves that he has ownership,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or does assume it; ev’n the other party</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We can as witness summon for ourselves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such things I can remember in my time.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now slept the Judge. The <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> silently</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went out into the hall, and sat him down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside a candle; from his pocket drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little book, which like a breviary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did ever serve him; never thrown aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At home or on a journey. It was the</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vocanda of the Tribunals;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a> therein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood all those actions written, which the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his own voice had summoned in the court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or those of which he later learned the names.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To eyes unlearnèd the Vocanda seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A catalogue of names; but to the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>These sketches were of splendid images.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He read and thought: Oginski versus <span xml:lang="pl">Wizgird</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dominicans and Rymsza, <span xml:lang="pl">Radziwill</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <span xml:lang="pl">Wereszczaka</span>, Rymsza, <span xml:lang="pl">Wyzogird</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Giedrojc</span>, and <span xml:lang="pl">Rdultowski</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Obuchowicz</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the <i xml:lang="pl">Kahal</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a> and Juraha and <span xml:lang="pl">Piotrowski</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Malewski</span> and <span xml:lang="pl">Mickiewicz</span>; and at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count against <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>; and in reading</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all these names he conjured memories</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those great causes; all the suit’s events,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And parties, court, and witnesses all stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before his eyes; he saw himself as in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white <i xml:lang="pl">zupan</i> and <i xml:lang="pl">kontusz</i> of dark blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood before the court; with one arm laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his sabre, and the other leaning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the table, having summoned both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parties, “Silence in the Court!” he cries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreaming and finishing his evening prayers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Litva’s latest <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> sank to sleep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such were the sports and contests in those years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a quiet Litvin village, while the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the world was drowned in tears and blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he, that Man, the god of war, with cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of regiments circled, armed with thousand guns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver eagles harnessed with the golden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his chariot, flew from Libya’s wastes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Alps, sky-touching, thunder after thunder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still hurling, at the Pyramids, at Tabor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marengo, Ulm and Austerlitz. Before him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran Victory and Conquest, and behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fame of such great deeds, in heroes’ names</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fruitful, that from the Nile with clamour went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the North, and ev’n on Niemen’s shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resounded, as from rocks, from <span xml:lang="pl">Moskpa</span>’s ranks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That guarded Litva, as with iron walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From news, to Russia dreadful as the plague.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet news not seldom, like a stone from heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell into Litva. Sometimes an old man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came begging bread, of arm or leg bereft;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who having charity received, stood still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heedfully did cast his eyes around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when he saw no Russian soldiers there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor a <i xml:lang="pl">jarmulka</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a> nor a collar red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He then told who he was; a legionist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His old bones bringing to that Fatherland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he no longer could defend. How then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble family around him pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the household choking with their tears!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat at table and told histories</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More wonderful than fable. He would tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How General <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span> strives to march</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Poland from Italian land;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a> how he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathers his countrymen on Lombard plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How <span xml:lang="pl">Kniaziewicz</span> commands from Capitol,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And victor, threw before the Frenchmen’s eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred bloody standards,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a> wrest away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From children of the Caesars. And likewise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How <span xml:lang="pl">Jablonowski</span> passed where pepper grows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where sugar melted is, and where the woods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet-smelling flourish in eternal spring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our general with the Danube’s legions there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Negroes threatens,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a> for his country sighs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man’s words in secret went around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The village; and some boy, who them had heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was sudden lost from home; in woods and swamps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lurked in secret; by the Muscovites</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursued, he sprang to hide him in the Niemen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And diving under, swam to Warsaw’s Duchy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where unto him a friendly voice did cry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Welcome unto us, comrade!” But ere parting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He mounted on a stony hill, and said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the river to the Muscovites:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Until we meet again!” Thus stole away</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Gorecki</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Pac</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Obuchowicz</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Piotrowski</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <span xml:lang="pl">Obolewski</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Rozycki</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Janowicz</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <span xml:lang="pl">Mierzejewski</span>, and <span xml:lang="pl">Brochocki</span>, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Bernatowicze</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Kupsc</span>, and Gedymin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With others whom I reckon not; they left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their parents and their land beloved; and goods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confiscate to the treasury of the Czar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betimes a wandering friar to Litva came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a strange convent, and when he beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knew the mansion of the village lords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He showed them the gazette, which he unripped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out his scapulary; therein stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The number of the soldiers, and the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of every legion’s general, of each man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>News of his victory, or of his death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus after many years a family</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received their first news of a son, his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glory, or death; they put on mourning, yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They dared not say for whom they mourning wore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The neighbourhood could only guess, and so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silent sorrow of their lords, or joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did form the sole gazette the peasants knew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And such a secret emissary friar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No doubt was Robak, for he often held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A conversation with the Judge alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after such discourse was always spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some news abroad, throughout the neighbourhood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bernardine did by his action show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had not always worn the cowl, nor in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The convent walls grown old; he bore a scar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the right ear, somewhat o’er the brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his cheek a trace of lance or ball,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not recent; sure he never got such wounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While reading missals. But not only dreadful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was he by looks and scars, for in his mien</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And voice was something soldierlike.</span>
					<span>At mass,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When from the altar with uplifted hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned towards the people, while he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Lord be with you!”⁠—even there at times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned round nimbly with a single action,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As wheeling round at his commander’s call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke the words of mass in such a tone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As officers before their squadrons use.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boys who served him at the mass knew this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In politics was Robak better versed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than in the lives of saints; upon his rounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Going, he tarried in the district town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of affairs; he letters oft received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which never before strangers opened he.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sent off messengers, but where and why</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said not; often did he creep by night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lordly mansions, and unceasingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He whispered with the nobles, and he passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er all the neighbouring hamlets there around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discoursing with the peasants not a little,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But always of those things which passed abroad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he comes to wake the Judge, who for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last hour was asleep; he has surely news.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
