<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book XI: The Year 1812</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-11" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Year 1812</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Spring omens⁠—Entrance of armies⁠—Divine service⁠—Official rehabilitation of <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek Soplica</span>⁠—The end ofthe lawsuit near at hand, to be inferred from the conversation of Gervasy and Protasy⁠—Love-scene between the lancer and the maiden⁠—The dispute concerning Kusy and Sokol is decided⁠—The guests assemble for the banquet⁠—Presentation of the betrothed couples to the generals.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Thou year! who in our country thee beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The year of beauty calls thee even now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But year of war the soldier; even yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our elders love to tell of thee, even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Song dreameth of thee. Long wert thou proclaimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By heavenly miracle, and thee forestalled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dumb rumours ’mid the people; all the hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Litvini with the sun of spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were girdled by some strange presentiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though before the ending of the world;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some expectation full of joy and fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first they drove the cattle forth in spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas marked, though lean and famished, they did not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rush on the winter-corn, green on the glebe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lay down on the mead, with heads bowed down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To low, or chew the cud of winter food.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At The villagers, who led the plough on field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now scarce rejoiced as they were wont to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At ending of long winter, for no song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sang; they laboured idly, as they neither</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recalled the seed-time nor the harvest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each step they stayed the oxen and the ponies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In harness, and with anxious heart they gazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the western quarter, as from thence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some miracle should be revealed, and marked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With anxious heart the homeward flying birds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For even thus early to his native pine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stork was flying, widely he unfurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His white wings, early standard of the spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after him in noisy regiments came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the waters swallows gathering thick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who from the late-thawed earth collected mud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To build their houses. And at eventide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The arriving woodcocks whispering were heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the thickets, and the wild-goose flock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmured above the wood, and wearied fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down with great uproar, for a halt, and in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sky’s dark depth the cranes continual cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing, the nightly guards inquire in fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence in the wingèd kingdom such confusion?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What storm thus early drives the birds away?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now behold a newer flock, that seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finches and plovers, starlings, flock of shining</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crests and of standards; brightly on the hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They shone, and on the plains they make descent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cavalry! Adornments wondrous, arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invisible, troop after troop; in midst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like melted snows, along the highways, glide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ranks sheathed in iron, from out the woods their caps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swarm blackly, and a row of bayonets gleams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ant-hill’s swarming infantry unnumbered.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All towards the north! It certain might be said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in that migratory time even men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Following the birds, were marching to our land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impelled by some mysterious instinct force.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men, horses, guns, and eagles, day and night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flow onward; in the sky flame here and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide blazes, earth is trembling, one may hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The thunders smite on every side.</span>
					<span>War! war!</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Litva there is not a foot of land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereto its uproar does not penetrate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mid the dark forest-lands the peasant, all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose parents and whose ancestors have died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not having passed beyond the forest’s bounds⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who understood in heaven no other cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than those of storm-winds, nor on earth beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The roars of beasts; had seen no other guests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than fellow-foresters, now sees⁠—in heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wondrous fire-blaze glowing, in the forest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A crashing hears; some wandering cannon-ball,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strayed from the field of battle, seeks its way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the forest, rending all its stems,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its branches severing. The bison, reverend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greybeard, did tremble in the moss, erected</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long hair of his mane, and half arose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaned on his forelegs, shook his beard, and gazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bewildered on the embers, glimmering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On sudden ’mid the broken clods. It was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wandering grenade, that whirled around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raged, and hissed, and burst with thunder-noise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bison, for the first time in his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt fear, and to the deepest refuge fled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A battle! where? In what part?” asked the youths.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They seized their weapons, women raise their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To heaven; all sure of victory, with tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cry, “Heaven is with Napoleon, he with us!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O spring! I, who beheld thee in our land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring-time renowned for war! spring-time of beauty!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O spring! I, who beheld thee blossoming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With corn and grass, and gleaming all with men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fruitful in doings, pregnant thou with hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see thee yet, fair phantom of a dream!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In slavery born, chained yet in infancy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had but one such spring-time in my life!</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Right by the high-road <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span> lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereby two leaders marched from Niemen’s side,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-244" id="noteref-244" epub:type="noteref">244</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prince Joseph and Jerome, Westphalia’s King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had already conquered part of Litva,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Grodno unto Slonim, when the King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commanded three days’ halt to breathe the troops.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But spite of weariness the Polish soldiers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lamented that the King forbade their march,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So gladly they would reach the Muscovite.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Prince’s chief staff in the neighbouring town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was quartered, but in <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span> stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The camp of forty thousand, with their staffs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Generals <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Kniaziewicz</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <span xml:lang="pl">Malachowski</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Giedroic</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Grabowski</span>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Late was it when they entered; therefore each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where best he might found quarters⁠—in the castle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the mansion. Orders swift were given;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sentinels were posted; each man, wearied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to his chamber for repose;⁠—with night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All things were silent, camp, and house, and field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone were seen, like shadows, wandering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patrols, and here and there the camp-fires’ gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And circling watch-words heard of army posts.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All slept⁠—the master of the house, the leaders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soldiers. But the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s eyes alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taste no sweet sleep; the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> must set forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next day a banquet, whereby he will make</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>’s house renowned for evermore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A banquet dear to hearts of Polish guests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suiting a great day’s solemnity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feast of the Church, and of the family.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow shall three couples be betrothed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But General <span xml:lang="pl">Dombrowski</span> yester-eve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had said he wished to have a Polish dinner.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though late the hour, the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> gathered quick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cooks from the neighbourhood; of these were five.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They serve, he plays the master. As chief cook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He girded him with apron white, indued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white cap, and his sleeves to elbow rolled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one hand was his fly-scare, to drive off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The miserable insects, greedily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the tit-bits falling; with the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wiped his spectacles and put them on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew forth a book, and opened it, and read.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The book entitled was, “The Perfect Cook.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-245" id="noteref-245" epub:type="noteref">245</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therein all specialties were plainly written</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Polish tables; after its direction</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count of <span xml:lang="pl">Tenczyn</span> those famed banquets gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Italy, whereat the Holy Father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Urban the Eighth, so marvelled.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-246" id="noteref-246" epub:type="noteref">246</a> After them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charles <span xml:lang="pl">Radziwill</span>, “Belovèd,” later on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he in <span xml:lang="pl">Nieswiez</span> King Stanislas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received, that memorable banquet made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose glory even now through Litva lives</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In story of the people.</span>
					<span>What the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reading did understand, and did explain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cooks intelligent at once fulfilled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The labour seethes, some fifty knives are clattering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the board, the scullions bustle round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As demons black; some carry wood, some jugs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wine and milk, they pour it into kettles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stewpans, and saucepans. Smoke bursts forth; two scullions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the oven sit, and blow the bellows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>, that the wood might easier burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commanded melted butter to be poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the wood-permitted such excess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in a wealthy house. The scullions heap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the fire dry brushwood; others place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the spits enormous roasts of beef,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of venison, quarters of the boar and stag;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some pluck great heaps of birds, the feathers fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In clouds⁠—grouse, heathcocks, chickens, all are stripped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But fowls were not in plenty; since that inroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which at the period of the foray made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murderous young Dobrzynski on the henhouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he Sophia’s care reduced to nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor left of reparation means, not yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>, once renowned for poultry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The birds again might flourish. For the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of every kind of meat was great abundance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which might be gathered there from house and shambles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the forests and the neighbourhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From near and far;⁠—thou’dst say the only thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They could not furnish forth was milk of birds.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-247" id="noteref-247" epub:type="noteref">247</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two things a liberal master seeks in feasts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were joined in <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>, art and plenty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Already had arisen the solemn day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weather was most fair, the hour was early,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the clear heaven was drawn around the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a hanging sea, still, concave-arched.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few stars glimmered from the deep, like pearls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From sea-depths through the billows; on one side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white cloud, one alone, flies lightly upward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the deep-blue sky were plunged its wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like parting pinions of a guardian angel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who by the nightly prayer of men detained,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over-late, hastes to return among</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>His fellow-denizens of heaven.</span>
					<span>Now quenched</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last faint pearls of stars, and in the depths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of skies extinguished were, and heaven’s brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is paler midmost. Its right temple, laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a pillow of shade, is swarthy still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The left aye redder blushes; farther off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A circle, like an eyelid broad, opes wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the midst the white part of an eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is seen, the iris and the pupil; now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sunbeam darted forth, and in the round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of skies it gleamed refracted, and it hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a white cloud like a golden lance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon this arrow, signal of the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sheaf of fires flew forth, a thousand rockets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That o’er the circle of the world did cross.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rose the sun’s eye. Somewhat yet asleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It winked, and trembling shook its radiant lashes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shining at once with all its seven hues.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once it shone with sapphire, redly glowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ruby, yellow with the topaz light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till all at once it flamed as crystal clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then like a gleaming diamond; lastly fiery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a great moon, like a twinkling star;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus through the heavens measureless did pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The lonely sun.</span>
					<span>To-day the Litvin people</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all the neighbourhood are gathered round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chapel ere the sunrise, as to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The announcement of some novel miracle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This gathering from the people’s piety</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In part proceeded, part from curiousness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this day will the generals be present</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At mass in <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>, those renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As leaders of our legions, they of whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people knew the names, and honoured them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like patron saints, and all whose wanderings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Campaigns, and battles were a national</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Gospel to Litva.</span>
					<span>Now some officers</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had come already, and a crowd of soldiers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people flocked around them, on them gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scarcely might believe their eyes, beholding</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fellow-countrymen in uniform,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed, free, and speaking in the Polish tongue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mass was performed. The tiny sanctuary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might not contain the whole assembly there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people kneel upon the grass, and gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inside the chapel doors, uncovering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their heads. The hair of the Litvanian folk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair-hued or yellow, golden shone like field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of ripened rye; and blooming here and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair hair of a maiden, with fresh flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adorned, or peacock’s eyes, with ribbons braided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adornment of the tresses, gleamed among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men’s heads, as ’mid wheat cornflowers and tares.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The many-coloured, kneeling crowd o’erspread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The field, and at the bell’s voice, as it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At blowing of the wind, the heads all bowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As corn-ears in a field.</span>
					<span>The village maids</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-day unto our Lady’s altar bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring’s earliest gifts, fresh branches of green herbs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All round in garlands and in nosegays dressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Altar and picture, and the belfry even,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And galleries. At times the morning breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When blowing from the east, the garlands strips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And throws on brows of kneeling worshippers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scatters them like fragrance from the censers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the Mass and sermon both were done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Presiding o’er the whole assembly now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain came forth, elected Marshal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-248" id="noteref-248" epub:type="noteref">248</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one accord, by all the District’s States,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wearing the Palatinal uniform,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A <i xml:lang="pl">zupan</i> gold-embroidered, the <i xml:lang="pl">kontusz</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tours brocade with fringes, massy girdle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where hung a sabre with a shagreen hilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a great diamond pin gleamed at his neck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White his Confederate cap, and thereupon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bunch of precious feathers; crests were these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of herons white; on festivals alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is worn so rich a plume, whose every feather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ducat costs. Thus clad, upon a hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the church he mounted. Round him pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The villagers and soldiers. Thus he spoke:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Brothers, the priest has late to you proclaimed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The freedom which the Emperor-king restored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the crown, and now to Litva’s Duchy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restored unto all Poland; ye have heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The government decrees, and convocation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summoning the Diet. I have but to speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few words to the people, on a matter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concerning the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span> family,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Lords of this place.</span>
					<span>“The region all remembers</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crime committed by the late <span xml:lang="pl">Pan Jacek</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span> here; but since you all do know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His crimes, ’tis time we likewise should proclaim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His merits to the world. The leaders of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our armies here are present, from whom I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have learned all that which now I tell to you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span> did not die, as rumour said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Rome, but only changed his former life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And state, and name, and all his crimes against</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God and the Fatherland he has effaced</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>By holy life, and by great deeds.</span>
					<span>“ ’Twas he,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Hohenlinden, who, when General <span xml:lang="pl">Richepanse</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-beaten, did bethink him of retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unknowing <span xml:lang="pl">Kniaziewicz</span> with help drew near;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>, Robak called, through swords and spears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore letters from <span xml:lang="pl">Kniaziewicz</span> to <span xml:lang="pl">Richepanse</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Announcing our men took the foe in rear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-249" id="noteref-249" epub:type="noteref">249</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He later on in Spain, when that our lancers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did capture Somosierra’s trenched crest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-250" id="noteref-250" epub:type="noteref">250</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Kozieltulski’s side was wounded twice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, as an envoy, charged with secret orders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To different regions travelled he, to sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spirit of the people, to unite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Secret societies, and form them. Lastly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>, his paternal nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he an insurrection did prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He perished in a foray. Just upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His death intelligence to Warsaw came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Majesty the Emperor had deigned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give him for his late heroic deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ensigns chivalrous of Honour’s Legion.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-251" id="noteref-251" epub:type="noteref">251</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wherefore all these things having in regard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, representing here the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojewode</span>’s rule,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my Confederation staff, proclaim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To you, that <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span> by his faithful service,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the Emperor’s favour, has effaced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stain of infamy, and now returns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To honour, and again he finds a place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ranks of truest patriots. Therefore who</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall dare remind the family of <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his long-expiated fault, shall fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the punishment of such reproach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As <i xml:lang="la">gravis notoe macula</i> declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The statute’s words; such penalty affects</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both <i xml:lang="la">militem</i> and <i xml:lang="und">scartabel</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-252" id="noteref-252" epub:type="noteref">252</a> who shall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put infamy upon a citizen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And since equality does now prevail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burghers and peasants this third article</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Likewise obliges.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-253" id="noteref-253" epub:type="noteref">253</a> Let this Marshal’s order</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The district Writer in the general Acts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inscribe, and let the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> set it forth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“As touches now the cross of Honour’s Legion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it arrived too late shall not detract</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From glory. If it might not <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span> serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ornament, be it a memory of him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us suspend it on his grave. Three days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let it hang here; then in the chapel lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cross, a votive offering to the Virgin.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This saying, the order from its covering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew, and hung upon the humble cross</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That marked the grave a crimson ribbon, tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In form of a cockade, and that white cross,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glittering with stars and with its golden crown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the sunbeams brightly shone the stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the last gleam of <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>’s earthly glory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile the people said upon their knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Angelus, for peace eternal praying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the sinner’s soul. The Judge addressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The guests and village crowd, inviting all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>To <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span> for the banquet.</span>
					<span>But</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the grassy bank before the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two old men sat, two measures full of mead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon their knees; they towards the orchard gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where like a sunflower, ’mid the poppy-buds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of various hue, there stood a lancer, wearing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shining <i xml:lang="pl">kolpak</i>, decked with golden metal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a cock’s feather; near to him a girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dress as green as lowly rue, upraised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eyes blue as heart’s-ease flowers towards the lad’s.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young maidens in the garden further off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were gathering flowers; purposely they turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their heads away from where the lovers stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that they might not trouble their discourse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But those two old men drank their mead, and from</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A snuff-box made of bark regaled each other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And talked.</span>
					<span>“Yes, yes, dear old Protasy,” said</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy, <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>.⁠—“Yes, dear old Gervasy,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protasy, <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>, said.⁠—“Yes, yes, just so,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They in accord repeated many times,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nodding their heads thereto. At length the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span>:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That wondrously this suit has ended I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not deny, yet there are precedents;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can remember lawsuits during which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far worse excesses happened than in ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But intermarriage ended all the evil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lopot to the <span xml:lang="pl">Borzdobohaci</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was reconciled, the <span xml:lang="pl">Krepsztuls</span> to the house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of <span xml:lang="pl">Kupsc</span>, and to Pikturna Putrament;</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Mackiewicz</span> to the <span xml:lang="pl">Odyniec</span> family,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Turno unto the <span xml:lang="pl">Kwileckis</span>. But</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What say I? Why, the Poles were used to have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Litva disagreements worse by far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than those of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span> and <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Queen <span xml:lang="pl">Jadwiga</span>, when she counsel took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did quickly end that feud without the courts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis well when parties have a maid or widow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give in marriage, thus a compromise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is always ready. Lawsuits always last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The longest with the clergy, or with kindred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too near related, for the action then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May never be with marriage brought to end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence come the unending feuds of Poles and Russians,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since they proceed from Lech and Russ, own brothers;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-254" id="noteref-254" epub:type="noteref">254</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence were so many Lithuanian suits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the Crusaders, till Jagellon won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence, to conclude, <i xml:lang="pl">pendebat</i> long before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The acts, that famous lawsuit of the <span xml:lang="pl">Rymszas</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the Dominicans, whence rose the proverb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘The Lord is greater than <span xml:lang="pl">Pan Rymsza</span>.’ But</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll warrant, mead is better than the Penknife.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This saying, he clinked his goblet with the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>’s.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“True, true,” replied Gervasy, greatly moved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wondrous have been the fortunes of our Crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of our Litva! Truly, like two consorts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven did unite them, and the devil part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Heaven his own, and to the devil his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! brother dear, Protasy, that our eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should see this! that these dwellers of the Crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Salute us! I served with them years ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I well remember they were brave Confederates.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If but the Pantler, my late master, had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lived to behold this day! O <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>! <span xml:lang="pl">Jacek</span>!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But why should we lament? This very day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Litva once more joineth with the Crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That too is reconciled, is blotted out.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And this a wonder is,” Protasy said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Concerning this Sophia, for whose hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Thaddeus now entreats⁠—a year ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was an omen, like a sign from Heaven.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lady Sophia!” broke the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We now must call her, since she is grown up;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is not a little girl; besides, she is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dignitary blood, the Pantler’s grandchild.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However,” did Protasy end, “there was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sign prophetic of her destiny.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw the sign with mine own eyes. A year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ago, our household on a holiday</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did sit here, drinking mead; but as we looked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down from the gable fell two sparrows fighting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both were old cock-birds; one, the younger, had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A patch of grey beneath the throat, the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A black one; they went scuffling through the court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still turning somersaults, until they rolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep in the dust. We looked on, and meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servants whispered to each other, ‘Let</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The black one be <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span>, and the other</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>;’ so as often as the grey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was uppermost, they cried, ‘Long live <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Fie! fie! <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszko</span> coward!’ and when he fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They cried, Up, up, <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>! give not in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the magnate; shame ’twere for a noble!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus jesting did we wait to see who conquered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But just then little Sophy, moved with pity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For those two birds, ran up, and covered o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both heroes with her little hand; they fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together in her hand, until their plumage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew wide, such rage was in those little devils!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old women whispered, looking on Sophia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it was surely the girl’s destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reconcile two houses long at feud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I see, to-day has rendered true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old women’s omen, though in truth they then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were thinking of the Count, and not of Thaddeus.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereto the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> answered: “Wonderful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Events are in this world; who all can fathom?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll also tell you something; although not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So wondrous as that omen, yet ’tis hard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of understanding. Thou dost know, that once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had been glad to drown the family</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicas</span> in a spoon of water;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-255" id="noteref-255" epub:type="noteref">255</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet this little fellow Thaddeus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was extremely fond of from a child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw that when he fought with other boys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He always beat them; so as oft as he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran to the castle, I would put him up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To some hard undertaking; he did all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were it to get down pigeons from the tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or pluck the mistletoe from off the oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or plunder crows’ nests from the highest pines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He did it all! I said unto myself⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘This lad is born beneath a lucky star;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pity ’tis that he is a <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But who had guessed the castle should in him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome its heir, the husband of my lady</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Sophia, my most gracious mistress?”</span>
					<span>Here</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old men left off their discourse, and drank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep thinking; only now and then were heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These few short words⁠—“Yes, yes, master Gervasy;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Yes, yes, master Protasy.”</span>
					<span>The green bank</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched close upon the kitchen, whereof stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The window open, and the steam burst forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from a conflagration; till from out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wreaths of steam, like to a white dove, gleamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chief cook’s white cap; through the kitchen window</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> o’er the old men’s heads his own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put forth, in silence listening their discourse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And offered them a saucer full of biscuits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying, “Eat these with your mead, and I meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will tell to you a curious history</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a dispute that well-nigh ended in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bloody fight, when, hunting in the depths</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Naliboko’s forests, <span xml:lang="pl">Rejtan</span> played</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A trick to Prince Denassau. This same trick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He well-nigh paid for with his own life. I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Composed the quarrel of these gentlemen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I will now relate to you.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-256" id="noteref-256" epub:type="noteref">256</a> But here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cooks broke off the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s story, asking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom he had charged to arrange the centre-piece.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> went away, and having emptied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their mead, the old men, in deep thought, their eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned to the garden depths, where held discourse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That handsome lancer with the maiden. He</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just then within his left hand taking hers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The right was in a sling, for he was wounded⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sophia, thou now must tell me once for all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere we change rings. I must be sure of this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What matter that last winter thou wert ready</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give thy word to me? I would not then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accept that word. For what to me availed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A promise forced? At that time I had stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short time in <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>. I was not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So vain I could delude myself to thinking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That by one look of mine I could awake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within thee love. I am no coxcomb; I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By mine own merits wished to gain thy love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though long I waited for it. Now thou art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So gracious as to give once more thy word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By what have I deserved so high a grace?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maybe thou takest me, Sophia, not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much from inclination, only that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine uncle and thine aunt to this persuade thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But marriage is, Sophia, a weighty thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advise with thine own heart; in this attend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No threatenings of thine uncle, nor thine aunt’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Persuasions. If thou feelest nought for me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But goodwill, we may this betrothal yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some time delay. I have no wish to bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy will, and we will wait awhile, Sophia.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nought hurries us, since yester evening I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Received commandment to remain in Litva,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drill-master in the regiment here, until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My wounds be healed. What then, beloved Sophia?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereto Sophia answered, raising up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her head, and looking shyly in his eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I do not well remember what occurred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long since; I know they all said that I must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be married to you; always I agree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Heaven’s will, and with my elders’ wish.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then dropping down her eyes, she added this:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Before you parted, if you recollect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Friar Robak died that stormy night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw that, in departing, you were grieved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leave us; there were tears within your eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those tears, I tell you truly, sank within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart, so I believe you, that you love me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As often as I prayed for your success,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You ever stood before me with those large</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shining tears. The Chamberlain’s wife then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went afterwards to Wilna, and she took me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There with her for the winter; but I longed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>, and that little room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where first at eve you met me by the table;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then took leave. I know not how, your memory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something like cabbage-seed in autumn sown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the winter quickened in my heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, as I said to you, unceasingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I longed for that apartment, and to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did something whisper, I again should find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You there, and so it happened. Having that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my heart, your name was often on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My lips; ’twas during Carnival at Wilna;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the young ladies said I was in love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now if I some one loved, who should it be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excepting you?” Thaddeus, with such a proof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of love delighted, took her by the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pressed it, and they together left the garden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to that lady’s bower, unto that room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Thaddeus had dwelt ten years ago.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now there the Regent tarried, wondrously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adorned, and served his fair betrothèd dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With running to and fro, and offering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rings, chains, and pots, and flasks, cosmetics, perfumes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joyful, he gazed with triumph on the bride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bride her toilette ended even now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sat before a mirror, taking counsel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the divinities of grace; the maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some with the curling-irons renew the stiffened</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rings of the tresses, others, kneeling, labour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Upon the flounces.</span>
					<span>While the Regent thus</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near his betrothed was busy, at the window</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A scullion knocked; a hare had just been seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hare, late stolen from the osiers forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran through the meadow, in the orchard sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the growing vegetables. There</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat, ’twere easy now to start him, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hunt him down, the greyhounds placing on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clearing. The Assessor hastens, dragging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the collar Sokol; after him makes haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Regent, calling Kusy. Both the dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> stations by the hedge, but then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betook him with his fly-scare to the orchard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trampling, and whistling, clapping, much he frightens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The game; the prickers, each one by the collar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His greyhound holding, pointing where the hare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is stirring, chuckled silently; the dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pricked up their ears impatiently, they trembled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like arrows twain upon one bowstring laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> gave the starting word;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hare straight darted from behind the hedge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the mead; the greyhounds after him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And presently, without a double, Sokol</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Kusy fell together on the hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From two sides in an instant, like a bird’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two wings, and plunged into the creature’s back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their teeth-like claws; the hare gave forth one cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grievous, as of a new-born child. The prickers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed to the spot; the hare now lifeless lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greyhounds tear the white fur on his breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The prickers stroked their dogs; meanwhile the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew from his girdle forth a hunting-knife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut off the feet, and said, “To-day the dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall have an equal fee, for they have both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Won equal glory, equal both in swiftness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Equal in labour; ‘Worthy is the palace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of <span xml:lang="pl">Pac</span>, and <span xml:lang="pl">Pac</span> is worthy of the palace;’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-257" id="noteref-257" epub:type="noteref">257</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthy the prickers of their greyhounds, worthy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greyhounds of their prickers. Here, behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your long and bitter quarrel now is done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, whom you chose as judge to hold your stakes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pronounce at length my sentence; both of you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have won; the pledges I restore; let each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receive his own again, and both you sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A peace.” Then at the old man’s invitation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prickers turned a joyous countenance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon each other, and together joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Their right hands, long divided.</span>
					<span>Then the Regent</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said, “Once I staked a horse with all its trappings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I notice gave before the local court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I deposited my ring as fee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto our Judge; a pledge deposited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returned may not be. Let the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This ring as a remembrance, and command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His name to be thereon engraved, or, if</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will, <span xml:lang="pl">Hreczecha</span>’s arms. The bloodstone’s smooth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gold was tried eleven times. That steed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lancers for the horse have requisitioned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still the saddle has remained with me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis praised by every connoisseur, as being</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Convenient, lasting, lovely as a toy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The saddle, in the Turkish Cossack style,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is narrow; in the front a pommel is;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon it precious stones, a cushion of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich stuff upon the seat; and when you spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the saddle-bow, on this soft down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the pommels you may sit at ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on a couch; and when you gallop”⁠—here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regent Bolesta, who, as well we know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loved gestures greatly, spread his legs apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though he sprang on horseback, then presenting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gallop, slowly rocked from side to side⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And when you set off in a gallop, then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There beams a splendour from the saddle-bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As gold were dropping from the charger, for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stirrup-bands are sprinkled o’er with gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And silver the broad stirrups gilded o’er.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the mouth-piece reins, and on the bridle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shine little buttons of the pearly shell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the breast-piece hangs a moon in shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Leliwa, that is, of the new moon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-258" id="noteref-258" epub:type="noteref">258</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>This splendid unique furniture⁠—’twas captured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Report says, in the battle of <span xml:lang="pl">Podhajce</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From some considerable Turkish noble⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receive, as proof of my regard, Assessor.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereto the Assessor answered, with the gift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delighted: “I one time my beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dog-collars, given me by Prince <span xml:lang="pl">Sanguszko</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pledged; made of shagreen, all with golden circles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inlaid, and with a leash of silk, whereof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The workmanship is precious as the stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shines upon it. I desired to leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This set an heirloom to my children⁠—certain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall have children, as I shall be married,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou knowest, to-day. But, Regent, be so good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to accept this set, I pray, in change</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thy rich furniture, and in remembrance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this dispute, which has prevailed for years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And has at last so honourably come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To end for both of us. Let peace now flourish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between us.” So they home returned, to announce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At table that the contest between Sokol</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And Kusy now was ended.</span>
					<span>Stories were</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> in the house had nurtured up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This hare, and secretly had let it loose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the garden, so to make agreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prickers by such conquest, far too light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man with such mystery performed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trick that he completely had deceived</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>. Some years later something</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scullion of this whispered, to renew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Assessor’s quarrel with the Regent, but</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain he spread such tales to wrong the dogs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> still denied it, and none then</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Believed the scullion.</span>
					<span>Now the guests assembled</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the great banquet-hall, the banquet waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conversed around the table, when the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entered, in Palatinal uniform,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And led in Master Thaddeus and Sophia.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thaddeus, his forehead with the left hand touching,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saluted with a soldier’s bow his leaders.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia, with glances cast upon the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blushing, the guests with curtsy welcomed, taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Telimena now to curtsy well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wore a garland on her head, in sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of spousal; for the rest, her dress was such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when to-day within the chapel she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid spring sheaves for the Virgin. She once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had reaped fresh bunches for the guests of herbs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one hand she distributes flowers and grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other hand adjusts the shining sickle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon her head. The leaders took the herbs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kissing her hands. Sophia once again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Curtsied all round, deep blushing.</span>
					<span>General</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Kniaziewicz</span> then raised her in his arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And printing on her brow a father’s kiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised up the girl, and set her on the table.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Applauding, all cried, “Bravo!” all enchanted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the girl’s beauty, but especially</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By her Litvanian dress, its simpleness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since for these leaders, who in wandering life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So long in foreign parts throughout the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had journeyed, wondrous charms the native dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Possessed, as it recalled to them their youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And former loves. Therefore, well-nigh with tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They thronged around the table; eagerly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gazed. Some pray Sophia would uplit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her head a little, and would show her eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some that she condescend to turn around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bashful maiden turned, but with her hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still veiled her eyes. Most joyful, Thaddeus gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And rubbed his hands together.</span>
					<span>Whether some one</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had given Sophia counsel to appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In such a dress, or she by instinct knew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every girl by instinct can divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What suits her countenance⁠—it is enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That for the first time in her life Sophia</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This morning was by Telimena scolded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her self-will, no fashionable dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Desiring, until she by tears prevailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she might thus be left, in simple dress.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She had a long, white petticoat, the dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short, of green camlet, with a rosy hem;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bodice likewise green, with rosy ribbons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laced cross-wise from the bosom to the neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bosom underneath, hid like a bud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath a leaf; white from the shoulders gleamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shift-sleeves, like the wings of butterflies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expanded for their flight; these at the wrist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were gathered, and with ribbon fastened there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The neck was likewise by the narrow shift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surrounded, with its collar girded up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a rosy breast-knot; earrings artfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carved out of cherry-stones, whose fashioning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been Dobrzynski’s pride; two tiny hearts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were there, with dart and flame, given to Sophia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Bustard wooed her. And upon the collar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There hung two strings of amber. On her shoulders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophia had thrown the ribbons of her tresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on her forehead placed, as reapers wont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A curvèd sickle, polished recently</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By reaping grass, bright, like the crescent moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Upon Diana’s brow.</span>
					<span>All praised, all clapped.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the officers from out his pocket</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew a portfolio, with some folds of paper.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spread them out, his pencil sharpened, moistened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked on Sophia, and drew. Scarce saw the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The paper and the pencil, when he knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sketcher, though a Colonel’s uniform,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich epaulettes, a truly lancer mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A darkened moustache, and a Spanish beard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had changed him greatly, yet the Judge him knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“How are you, my Illustrious, gracious Count?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have you in your cartridge-box your travelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Painting materials?” ’Twas the Count indeed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not long a soldier, but because he owned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large revenues, and at his own expense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A regiment had of cavalry equipped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the first fight borne him gallantly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Emperor on that day had named him Colonel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did the Judge salute the Count, and on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His rank congratulated him; the Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard nothing, but still drew with diligence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile the second pair betrothed came in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Assessor, once the Czar’s, to-day Napoleon’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devoted servant; under his command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had a body of gendarmes, and though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce twenty hours in office, he already</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wore the grey uniform with Polish facings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dragged a crooked sabre at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clinked his spurs. With stately step beside him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came his beloved, magnificently dressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thekla <span xml:lang="pl">Hreszczanka</span>, for the Assessor long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had cast off Telimena, and as more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sadden this coquette, his true affections</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had turned towards the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojszczanka</span> now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not over-young the bride was, she well-nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reached middle age, but a good manager,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With dignity and dowry; for besides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hamlet she inherited, the Judge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her dowry by a small sum had increased.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The third pair vainly they long time await:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge impatient grew, and servants sent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning, these bring answer, the third bridegroom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Regent, starting forth the hare, had lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ring; he sought it in the meadow, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Regent’s lady, though herself she hastes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though the serving-women her assist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot by any means her toilette end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She scarcely will at four o’clock be ready.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
