<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book IX: The Battle</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Battle</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Of the danger resulting from disorderly camping out⁠—Unexpected succour⁠—Sad situation of the nobles⁠—A begging friar’s rounds are an omen of rescue⁠—Major Plut by excessive gallantry draws a storm on himself⁠—A shot from a pocket-pistol the signal of war⁠—Deeds of the Baptist, deeds and danger of Matthew⁠—The Bucket saves <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span> by an ambush Cavalry auxiliaries, attack on infantry⁠—The deeds of Thaddeus⁠—Duel of the leaders, interrupted by treachery⁠—The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> by a decisive manoeuvre turns the scale of war⁠—The bloody deeds of Gervasy⁠—The Chamberlain a magnanimous victor.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>And in such sound sleep lay they that they woke not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At shine of lanterns, nor the entering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of several men, who fell upon the nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As those wall-spiders named scythe-spiders pounce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On flies half-sleeping. Scarcely one may buzz,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lengthy legs its cruel conqueror</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embraces it around, and strangles it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sounder than the sleep of flies, the sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was of the nobles; not one buzzed; they all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay there as lifeless, though by powerful arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seized, and rolled over like to packs of straw.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alone the Bucket, who no equal owned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all the district for his strength of head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At banquets, could two firkins drink of mead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere his tongue tripped him, or his legs him failed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he had feasted long, and deeply slept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave yet some sign of life. He oped one eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw⁠—true nightmares. Two most dreadful faces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right o’er him! each a pair of whiskers bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt their breath, their whiskers touch his lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They move their fourfold hands like wings around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afraid, he tried to sign the cross; in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would raise his hand, the right hand pinioned seemed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He moved the left; he felt, alas! the spirits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had bound him like an infant swathed in bands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He feared things yet more dreadful, oped his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay unbreathing, stiff, and all but dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But yet the Baptist strove to save himself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was too late! already he was fastened</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own girdle; yet he writhed about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made such powerful springs, he fell upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sleepers’ chests, among their heads he rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a pike-fish flung himself about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who throws him on the sand, and like a bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He roared aloud, for he had powerful lungs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He roared out “Treachery!” The whole assembly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waked up, and all in chorus answered, “Treachery!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Violence! and treachery!”</span>
					<span>To the mirrored hall</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The echoes of that shout arrived, where slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count, Gervasy, and the jockeys. Then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy woke, in vain he strove to rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his own rapier bound in stick-like form.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked, and through the window armèd men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perceived, in low black hats, green uniforms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of these one, girded with a scarf, upheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sword, and with its point his company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of soldiers ordered, whispering the while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bind! bind!” Around like sheep the jockeys lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bonds; the Count sits unbound, but disarmed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside him stand, with naked bayonets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two soldiers. These Gervasy recognised.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Alas! they are Muscovites!!</span>
					<span>Not seldom had</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> been in such a plight before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not seldom ropes were on his feet and hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet could he free himself; he knew the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break asunder bonds; great strength had he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trust in himself; in silence he considered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How best release himself. He closed his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though he slept; he slowly lengthened out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both feet and hands, drew in his breath, compressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His chest unto the narrowest, until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once contracting, swelling, rolling up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a serpent hides both head and tail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among his folds, Gervasy thus from long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew short and thick; the ropes expanded, they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did even creak, but still they did not burst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> turned him round in shame and rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the ground his angry visage hid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eyes closed, he lay insensible as wood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then woke the drums: at first full low, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ever greater and with louder rattle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At this <i xml:lang="fr">appel</i> the Russian officer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ordered the Count and jockeys to be locked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the hall, and under guard, to lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles to the mansion, where there stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The second band. In vain the Baptist strove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And flung himself about.</span>
					<span>The staff was placed</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the mansion, and with it were many</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well-armed nobility, <span xml:lang="pl">Podhajscy</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <span xml:lang="pl">Birbaszowie</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Hreczechy</span>, Biergele,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relations all, or friends unto the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hastened to his succour when they heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the attack, the more because they long</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Had been at feud with the Dobrzynskis.</span>
					<span>Who</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Muscovite battalion from the hamlets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had brought? Who from the nobles’ farmsteads round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fast had summoned all the neighbourhood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Assessor was it? or else <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span>?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this were differing tales, but no one knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For certain, either then, or later on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now had the sun arisen, all bloody red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stripped of his beams, half seen, and half in clouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concealed, like horseshoe in a smithy’s coals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enkindled. Now the wind increased, and blew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clouds from the eastward quarter, thick and ragged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like ice-floes; every cloud cold drizzly rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In flying scattered; after it the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew swift, and dried the rain up; and again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A damp cloud following the wind rushed on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the day by turns was chill and rainy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile the Major ordered to be brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some beams that near the house were laid to dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in each beam with hatchet to be cut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A half-round opening, and in these holes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To insert the prisoners’ legs, and close them round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With other beams. Both logs of wood, with nails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Secured upon the corners, tightly pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like canine jaws upon their legs; their hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were tighter yet secured behind their backs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Major, to increase their torment, ordered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their caps to be first stripped from off their heads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their cloaks from off their shoulders, their <i xml:lang="pl">kontusze</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ev’n <i xml:lang="pl">taratatki</i>, even their <i xml:lang="pl">zupany</i>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the nobles, fettered in the stocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat in a row, their teeth all chattering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In cold and rain, for still the wet increased.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain the Baptist strove, and flung about.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In vain the Judge made intercession for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noblemen, and Telimena joined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entreaties to Sophia’s tears, to use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the prisoners greater gentleness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The officer, indeed, who led the band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nikita <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>, though a Muscovite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A good man,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-222" id="noteref-222" epub:type="noteref">222</a> let himself be pacified.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what of that when he must Major Plut</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Himself obey?</span>
					<span>This Major was by race</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Pole from <span xml:lang="pl">Dzierowicz</span>, and named, ’twas said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Polish <span xml:lang="pl">Plutowicz</span>; but he had taken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another name; a rascal great was he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As usual with a Pole who makes himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Muscovite in service of the Czar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plut with his pipe stood there before the front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hands upon his side; and when folks bowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him, he lifted up his nose in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for all answering he blew as sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of angry humour from his mouth a cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of smoke, and went away into the house.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But meantime had the Judge made Rykow mild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And led the Assessor likewise on one side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consulting how to finish this affair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without a trial, and, yet more important,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without entanglement with government.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Captain <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> said to Major Plut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sir Major, what to us are all these prisoners?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must we deliver them unto the law?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twill be a great misfortune to the nobles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none will give you, Major, aught for this.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Major, do you know how we’ll best compose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This business? Let the Judge reward your pains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll say that we came here a-visiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus will the goats be whole, the wolf be fed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a Russian proverb, ‘All things can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be done, if but with prudence.’ And a proverb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is this, ‘Roast on the Czar’s spit for yourself.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this too is a proverb, ‘Better is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agreeing than disagreement,’ ‘Weave thou well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The knot, and put the end in water.’ We</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Need give in no report, so none need know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ‘God gave hands to take’⁠—a Russian proverb.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This hearing, up the Major starts and snorts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With anger: “<span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>, are you mad? This is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The imperial service, service is not friendship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stupid old <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>! Are you mad? Shall I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let mutineers loose, in these warlike times?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ha ha! you Poles! I’ll teach you mutiny!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You miserable nobles! you Dobrzynskis!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eh! I’ll soon teach you! Let the wretches soak!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He roared with laughter, from the window looking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why, there’s that same Dobrzynski in a surtout!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hey! strip him of his surtout! last year he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began at a redoubt this quarrel with me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who began it? He it was, not I.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, when I danced, exclaimed, ‘Put out that thief!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I was then accused of pilfering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The regimental chest, and undergoing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Examination, and in mighty trouble.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what was that to him? As I was dancing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cried behind me ‘Thief!’ the noblemen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Hurrah!’ They wronged me; what then? In my claws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This wretched nobleman has fall’n. I said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Eh! what! Dobrzynski, eh! “The goat has come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the wagon.” ’ What, Dobrzynski, now?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou seest it may come unto a flogging!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then to the Judge he whispered in his ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Judge, if you wish the affair to pass off well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every head pay down a thousand roubles<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-223" id="noteref-223" epub:type="noteref">223</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ready cash; a thousand roubles, Judge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>That’s the last word.”</span>
					<span>The Judge to bargain tried;</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Major would not hear; about the room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He walked, and belched thick smoke, as does a squib</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or rocket; while the women followed him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weeping and praying. “Major,” said the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What will you gain, if you do summon us?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There here has been no bloody fight, there were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None wounded; as they ate the hens and geese,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>According to the statute, they must pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full compensation. I’ll bring no complaint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the Count; that only was a common</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Quarrel of neighbours.”</span>
					<span>“Judge,” the Major said,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have you yet read the Yellow Book?”⁠—“What is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Yellow Book?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-224" id="noteref-224" epub:type="noteref">224</a> the Judge inquired.⁠—“A book,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Major answered, “better than your statutes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every other word therein is, ‘ropes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Siberia, knout!’ the book of martial law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaimed now through all Litva; your tribunals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are now beneath the table.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-225" id="noteref-225" epub:type="noteref">225</a> For a trick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like this, according to our martial law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll get hard labour in Siberia</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At least.”⁠—“I will appeal,” the Judge replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Unto the governor.”⁠—“Appeal,” said Plut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Even to the Emperor. You know that when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Emperor confirms a ukase, often</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He through his clemency the penalty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Increases twofold. You appeal; perhaps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll find out in necessity, Sir Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A good hook ev’n for you! For that spy, <span xml:lang="pl">Jankiel</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom long the government has watched, he is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your servant, dwelling in your tavern. Now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can arrest you all together.”⁠—“Me!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge exclaimed; “arrest me! How will you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dare without orders?” And the quarrel grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever more violent, when at once arrived</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>A new guest in the courtyard.</span>
					<span>A tumultuous</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrival ’twas. First as some wondrous courier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A monstrous black ram entered; with four horns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head was bristling, whereof two like arches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were twisted round his ears, and decked with bells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And two, whose ends protruded from his brows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook balls, round, brazen, clattering. After him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came oxen, and a flock of sheep and goats;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind the beasts four heavy laden wains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All guessed it was the entrance of the friar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge, who knew the duties of a host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood on the threshold to salute his guest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The priest upon the foremost carriage rode;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hood half hid his visage, but they quickly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did know him, for as he the prisoners passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned his face to them, and beckoning made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The driver of the second car likewise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They knew; old Matthew ’twas, the Rod, disguised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In peasant garments; soon as he appeared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles raised a shout. He said, “Ye fools!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his hand commanded them be still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The third the Prussian bore in ragged coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Zan and <span xml:lang="pl">Mickiewicz</span> were in the fourth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile <span xml:lang="pl">Podhajscy</span> and <span xml:lang="pl">Isajewicze</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Birbasze</span>, <span xml:lang="pl">Wilbikowie</span>, Biergiele,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Kotwicze</span>, seeing the Dobrzynski nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this harsh slavery, began to cool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down from their former anger by degrees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Poland’s nobles, though most quarrelsome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And very quick to fight, are not vindictive.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they for counsel to old Matthew haste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stations the assembly round the cars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And orders them to wait.</span>
					<span>The Bernardine</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then entered in the room; they hardly knew him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although not changed in dress, for he had taken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon him such a different mood. By custom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gloomy and thoughtful, now he raised his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a cheerful mien, like jovial friar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere he began to speak, laughed loud and long.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ha! ha! ha! I salute you, ha! ha! ha!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most excellent! first-rate! Sir officers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoever hunts by day, you hunt by night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good hunting! I have seen the game. Ay, ay!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pluck, pluck the nobles, strip ’em of their husks!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ay, put a bit on ’em, for they are skittish!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must congratulate you, Major, on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catching the little Count. ’Tis a fat morsel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich, and a young lord from his ancestors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don’t let him from the cage, without you get</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three hundred ducats, and when you have got it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give some three farthings to the convent, and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me, for I’ll pray always for your soul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I’m a Bernardine, I often think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About your soul. Death seizes by the ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even staff-officers. Well Baka wrote,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-226" id="noteref-226" epub:type="noteref">226</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Death lurks behind the executioner</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In scarlet, and not seldom soundly knocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the coat, and smites on linen as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a hood, on frizzled locks as on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The uniform.’ Says Baka: ‘Mother Death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is like an onion, since she forces tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where’er she presses; but unto her breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She folds alike the child that will be lulled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the roaring bully.’ Ah! ah! Major, we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do live to -day, to-morrow die. That only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is ours that we to-day may eat and drink.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Judge, perhaps it’s time for breakfast now?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll sit at table, and beg all to sit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With me. Some <i xml:lang="pl">zrazy</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-227" id="noteref-227" epub:type="noteref">227</a> Major? Sir lieutenant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What think you? If we had a bowl of punch?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“True, father,” both the officers replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis time to eat, and drink the Judge’s health.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The household wondered, as they gazed on Robak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence he derived such mien, and merriment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge then gave these orders to the cook:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bowl, sugar, bottle, <i xml:lang="pl">zrazy</i>. All were brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> and Plut did labour with such will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devoured so eagerly, and drank so deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In half-an-hour of <i xml:lang="pl">zrazy</i> twenty-three</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They ate, and emptied half a mighty punch-bowl.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Major, satiate and merry, hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself into an arm-chair, drew his pipe out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lit it with a bank-note; with a napkin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wiped his breakfast from his lips, and turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A laughing look upon the women, saying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I like you, pretty ladies, as dessert;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, by my epaulettes of Major, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man has eaten breakfast, after meat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nicest relish is a talk with ladies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pretty as you, fair ladies! I know what.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let’s play at cards, at <i xml:lang="und">welba-cwelba</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-228" id="noteref-228" epub:type="noteref">228</a> whist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or⁠—a mazurka! ha! three hundred devils!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am I not best mazurist in the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regiment of <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i>.” Therefore to the ladies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bent half double, and by turns blew out</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Tobacco-smoke and compliments.</span>
					<span>“A dance!”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried Robak; “as I empty out a bottle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, though a priest, at times tuck up my gown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dance mazurkas! But you know this, Major,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We here are drinking, but the <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> freezing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind the house. Drinking is drinking. Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give ’em a whisky cask. The Major will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Allow this; let the valiant <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> drink.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’d ask it,” said the Major, “but herein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is no compulsion.”⁠—“Give ’em, Judge,” did whisper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robak, “a cask of spirits.” And thus, while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The merry staff were swilling in the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind it, drinking in the ranks began.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In silence Captain <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> drained his cup.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at the same time as he drank, the Major</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made to the ladies compliments; and ever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The zeal for dancing greater in him grew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He threw away his pipe, and seized the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Telimena; he would dance, she fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So went he to Sophia, and bending double,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invited her to a mazurka. “Here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>, leave off puffing at your pipe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put down that pipe, for you can play the lute.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don’t you see that guitar? come, take it up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play a mazurka. I, the Major, will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make one in the first couple.” So the Captain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took the guitar, began to screw the strings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plut once more Telimena asked to dance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Upon a Major’s word, Miss, I’m no Russian.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll be a dog’s son, if I’m telling lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I tell lies⁠—inquire; the officers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will witness all, and all the army says it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in this second army, the ninth corps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The second foot division, fifteenth regiment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i>, Major Plut’s the best mazurist.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So come along, Miss, don’t be obstinate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or like an officer I’ll punish you.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This saying, he sprang, seized Telimena’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on her pale arm gave a smacking kiss;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Thaddeus, springing from one side, bestowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blow upon his face. The kiss and blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together sounded, one behind the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>As word may follow after word.</span>
					<span>The Major</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was all confounded, rubbed his eyes, and pale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With anger, cried, “Rebellion! mutineer!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drawing his sword, made haste to pierce his foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from his sleeve the priest a pistol drew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fire, Thaddeus,” he cried, “as at a candle.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick Thaddeus seized it, measured aim, and fired.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He missed, but stupefied and singed the Major.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up started Rykow with his instrument.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rebellion!” cried he, and on Thaddeus rushed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> brandished from behind the table</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A knife held backwards. Through the air it hissed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the heads, and sooner struck than gleamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It struck the depth of the guitar, the inside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To outside turning. <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> bent aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus avoided death, though much frightened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclaiming, “<i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i>, mutiny, by heaven!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew his sword, and making good defence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Drew near the threshold.</span>
					<span>Presently there entered</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the other side the room, and through the window,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A many nobles, armed with rapiers, led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On by the Rod. Plut reached the hall, and <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind him; they the soldiers call; already</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three nearest to the house as succour haste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now through the doors three gleaming bayonets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creep in, and after them three low black hats.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Rod uplifted Matthew in the doorway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood, leaning ’gainst the wall; he lay in wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like cat that watches mice, till fierce he smote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And may be the three heads had rolled on earth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But either the old man’s sight served him ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or over-great his ardour; ere they gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their necks to him, he smote upon their hats;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tore them, but the Rod, down falling, clashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On bayonets; the Muscovites drew back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Matthew drove them out into the court.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There the confusion was still greater.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>’s partisans with emulation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worked at unfettering the Dobrzynskis, tore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stocks asunder. Seeing this the <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rush to their swords, and hasten to the place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sergeant with a bayonet pierced Podhajski,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounded two other noblemen, a third</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shot at, and they fled. The Baptist still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was in the stocks; with hands already free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready for combat he arose, upraised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hand, and doubled up his lengthy fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from above upon a Russian’s back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fierce he smote, he brow and visage beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the carbine’s lock. The lock was stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But drenched in blood the powder kindled not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sergeant rolled o’er at the Baptist’s feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his weapon. Baptist bent him down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seized his rifle by its barrel. Whirling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rifle like his Sprinkler round, high raised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round turning like a windmill’s sails, at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He on the shoulders smote two rank and file,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knocked a corporal upon the head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest in terror drew back from the stocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Baptist with a moving roof protected</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The nobles.</span>
					<span>After breaking of the stocks,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cutting ropes, the nobles being free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now fell upon the wagons of the friar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from them drew forth rapiers, sabres, swords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firearms, and scythes. The Bucket found two guns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, with a sack of bullets; in his rifle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He poured them, and another gun like charged</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Left for the Bustard.</span>
					<span>Now arrived more <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i>.</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confused they grow, together crowded, stumbling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles cannot in the tumult smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cross-cut, and the <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> cannot fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now hand to hand they fight, steel, tooth by tooth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encountering steel, is shivered; bayonet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meets sabre, scythe on hilt is broken, fist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meets fist, and arm meets arm. But <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> hastes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With some part of the <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i>, where the barn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth meet the hedge; there stands he, to his soldiers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He calls, to end a battle so misruled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein, with weapons never used, they fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the blows of fists. Enraged that he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself may fire not, since in such a crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows not Muscovites from Poles, he cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Draw up!” which meaneth, form in rank and file.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’mid the shouting none his orders heard.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old Matthew, for these combats hand to hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unsuited, backward drew, a clear space made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To right and left before him on his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, with his sabre’s end, the bayonets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wipes off from the barrels of the guns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As candle-wicks from lights; then, backwards striking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He heweth down, or pierceth; thus retreated</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prudent Matthew from the battle-field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But with the greatest fury on him rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old Gefreiter,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-229" id="noteref-229" epub:type="noteref">229</a> trainer to the regiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mighty master of the bayonet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gathered him together, bent, and seized</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The carbine in both hands, the right upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lock, the left the barrel midmost grasped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He twisted, skipped, at times seemed half to sit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his right hand forward pushed the gun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like sting from snaky jaws, and once again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew it backwards, leaning on his knee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus twisting, springing, Matthew he attacked.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old Matthew straight discerned his foeman’s skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his left hand placed his spectacles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his nose, the right against his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sustained the handle of the Rod; he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back, the Gefreiter’s motions with his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pursuing. He himself upon his legs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went sloping, as though drunken. The Gefreiter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More quickly runs, and sure of victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reach the easier his retreating foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rose, and all his right arm far outstretched,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rifle forward pushing, so he made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself the stronger by the force of pushing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weapon’s weight, until he forward bent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Matthew thither, where the bayonet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He saw inserted in the barrel, placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Rod beneath, and upwards smote the weapon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then dropping presently his Rod, he slashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Russian on the hand; once, and again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With backward stroke he cleft in twain his jaw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the Gefreiter fell, chief fencing-master</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Muscovites, and cavalier</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With crosses three, and medals four.</span>
					<span>Meanwhile,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the stocks the nobles’ left-hand wing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already were near victory. There fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sprinkler, seen from far, the Razor moved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Muscovites; one cut them through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The middle of the body, on the head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other smote them, like to that machine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which German masters have invented, called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thrasher; but it is at the same time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A straw-cutter, possessing flails and knives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It chops up straw and beats out grain at once.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus do the Sprinkler and the Baptist work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In common, slaying foes, one from above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And from below the other.</span>
					<span>But the Baptist</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now casts aside his certain victory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rushes to the left wing, where fresh danger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is threatening Matthew. The Gefreiter’s death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avenging, with a long spontoon comes on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ensign. A spontoon at once is spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And axe, neglected, or only used</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On board the fleet; but at that time it served</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The infantry. The ensign, a young man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved round with skill; oft as his foeman thrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aside his weapon, back he drew, and Matthew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not the young man overtake, and thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wounding or not wounding, he must fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defend himself. Now with the pike the ensign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had given him a light wound; now on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His battle-axe upraising, he prepared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deal the blow. The Baptist could not run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the spot, but stood half-way and whirled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His weapon round, and underneath the feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He threw it of the foe. He broke a bone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spontoon from his hand the ensign dropped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tottered; on him falls the Baptist; him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A crowd of nobles follow, and upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles rush the Muscovites confused</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the left wing. War now began around</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The Sprinkler.</span>
					<span>For the Baptist, who in helping</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Matthew had lost his sword, well-nigh had paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This service with his own life. For on him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There fell two powerful Russians from behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all at once the fourfold hands were tangled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among his hair; fast planted on their feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They pulled as tight as springy ropes, fast bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto a barge’s mast. In vain the Baptist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dealt blind strokes backwards; he was failing fast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But presently he saw that near to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gervasy combated; he shouted loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>“Jesus, Maria! Penknife!”</span>
					<span>By the shout</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing the Baptist’s trouble, turned the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blade lowered of the flexile steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the Baptist’s head and Russians’ hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They drew back, uttering loudly piercing cries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one hand, stronger tangled in the hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remained there hanging, dripping streams of blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus a young eagle, who has struck one claw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a hare to hold the quarry fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While clinging with the other to a tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struggling to liberate himself, half tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In twain the spreading eagle; in the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remains the right claw, but the left, all bleeding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is borne off by the hare into the plains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Baptist being free, turns round his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretches his hands, and for a weapon seeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calls for a weapon. Meanwhile with his fist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He threatens, standing strong in act to walk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself protecting by Gervasy’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till in the crush he views his son the Bustard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bustard with his right hand points his gun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The left behind him drags a six-foot tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All armed with flints, and knobs, and hardened knots,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-230" id="noteref-230" epub:type="noteref">230</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>No hand could lift it but the Baptist’s own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon as his well-loved arm the Baptist viewed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Sprinkler, swift he seized it, kissed it, sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joy; he whirled it round his head, at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>In blood imbrued.</span>
					<span>What deeds he after did,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or what defeat around him spread, ’twere vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sing; for none would credit give the Muse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As none to that poor woman credit gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Wilna, who, while standing on the height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the Ostra gate, beheld how <span xml:lang="pl">Dejow</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Russian leader, with a Cossack regiment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entering, already open forced the gate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now one burgher, <span xml:lang="pl">Czarnobacki</span> named,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slew <span xml:lang="pl">Dejow</span>, and annihilated all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The Cossack regiment.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-231" id="noteref-231" epub:type="noteref">231</a></span>
					<span>’Tis enough that thus</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It happened even as <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> had foreseen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> in the crowd succumbed unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strength of their antagonists. On earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of slain lay twenty-three; some thirty groaned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wounds all covered; many fled and hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the orchard, ’mid the hops, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The river; some into the house had rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the vantage of the women there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With shout of joy the conquering nobles rushed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These to the wine-casks, these to strip the spoils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From off their foes. Robak alone did not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The triumphs of the nobles share; though he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself had fought not hitherto the canons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbid a priest to fight⁠—he as a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of great experience gave counsels, viewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The field of battle round from different sides;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With glance, with beckoning of hand, he gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh courage to the combatants, and guided</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their movements. And he now unto them called</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To join themselves to him, to strike on <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make the victory complete. Meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He through an envoy signified to <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That if he would lay down his arms he should</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Preserve his life; but if he still delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give his sword up, Robak will command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hem the remnant in, and cut them down.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In no wise Captain Rykow quarter asked.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The half-battalion gathering round himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cried, “Make ready!” Presently the file</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their rifles grasped, the weapons crashed, but they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were loaded long before. He cried, “Present!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In long file gleamed the guns; he cried out, “Fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turn!” one after other thundered loud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While one takes aim, one loads, another grasps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rifle in his hand. Resounds the hiss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bullets, click of locks, the ramrod’s crash;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The whole file like a moving reptile seems,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand glittering feet together moving.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis true that all the <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> drunken were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the strong liquor, for they aimed but ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And missed; they rarely wound, and seldom kill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet two Matthews have already wounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one of the Bartholomews lies low.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles rarely fire, with but few guns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They would with sabres strike upon the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The elder men restrain them; thick the balls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whistle, they wound, they drive on; soon they make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The courtyard clear before them, now begin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To clatter on the mansion’s window-panes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thaddeus, who by his uncle’s orders had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stayed in the mansion to defend the women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now hearing loud and louder rage the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran forth; the Chamberlain rushed after him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since Thomas brought to him at length his sabre.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hastened, joined him to the noblemen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placed him at their head; rushed on, upraised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sword; the nobles at his pointing moved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i>, them admitting, poured a hail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bullets. Wounded lay <span xml:lang="pl">Isajewicz</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilbik, and Razor. Robak after this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restrains the nobles on one side, and Matthew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restrains them on the other. In their zeal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles colder grow, look round, draw back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Russians mark this. Captain <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> thinks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strike the last blow, from the court to drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles, and the mansion to command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Form for the charge!” he cried, “and to your pikes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward!” and presently the file, their stocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Planting like hop-poles, bent their heads, and marched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forwards, and quickened step. In vain the nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resist them from the front, fire on the wings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The file already had o’er-passed the court.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Captain, pointing with his sword unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The house-door, crieth, “Yield, <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>, or</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll give command to fire the house!” “Then fire it,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replied the Judge, “I’ll fry me at that fire.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O house of <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span>! if unhurt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy white walls gleam beneath the elm-trees still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If still the assembly of the neighbouring nobles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit at the Judge’s hospitable board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They surely often drink the Bucket’s health;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without him <span xml:lang="pl">Soplicowo</span> were undone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Bucket hitherto few proofs of courage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had given, though from the stocks the first set free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the nobles, though immediately</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He found his well-loved Bucket in the cart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His favourite gun, there with a sack of balls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would not fight; he trusted not himself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, while fasting. So he went where stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tub of spirits, in his hand he raised.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stream, as with a spoon, unto his lips.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, soon as he well strengthened was and warmed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He set his cap right; from his knees he took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bucket in both hands; the powder rammed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down in the gun, and poured the priming o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looked upon the battle-field. He saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How that bright wave of bayonets smote and sundered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nobles; he against this billow swam;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stooped him down to earth, and dived among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thick grass in the courtyard’s midst; till there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where nettles grew, he close in ambush laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>And called by signs the Bustard to him.</span>
					<span>He</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood on the threshold, with his gun defending</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mansion, for his dear Sophia lived there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though by her his suit remained despised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loved her ever, and in her defence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Were glad to perish.</span>
					<span>Now the file of <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i></span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Already on the nettles had encroached</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marching, when Bucket drew the trigger back;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the jaws of that deep-throated gun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dozen balls all jagged let he fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Muscovites. A second dozen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bustard hurls. The <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> were confused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And frightened at the ambush, all the file</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wound in a knot, drew back, threw out their wounded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the Baptist drove them back again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The barn was far off. Fearing a long round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the garden wall had <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> sprung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There in their course he stayed his flying band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ranked them, but he changed their form of file.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one file he composed a triangle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sharp wedge pointed forward, but two sides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He placed against the garden wall. Well did he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For horsemen from the castle rushed on him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Count, who in the castle under guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Muscovites had been, when fled dispersed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The frightened guard, his courtiers placed on horse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hearing shots, he led his cavalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right under fire; himself the foremost rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sabre lifted high. Then <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The half-battalion fire!” A fiery thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then flew along the locks, and from the sable</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Barrels projecting forward, whistled forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three hundred bullets. Of the cavalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three fell down wounded; one man lay a corpse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count’s horse fell, and fell the Count; the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran, crying out for help, for he had seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> for their target take the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the <span xml:lang="pl">Horeszkos</span>, by spindle side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robak stood nearer; with his body he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count did cover, and for him received</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shot; he drew him from beneath his horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commanded that the nobles step apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take better aim, and spare resultless shots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lurk behind the hedges, or the wells,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind the walls of cowsheds; and the Count</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall with his horsemen wait a better time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Most marvellously Thaddeus understood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plans of Robak, and accomplished them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood concealed behind a wood-built well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as he aimed with coolness and with skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a two-barrelled gun⁠—he well could hit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A florin thrown in air⁠—inflicted thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most horrid wounds on Muscovy. He chose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seniors; and his first shot slew at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sergeant-major, then from both the barrels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each after each he cut two sergeants off.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now at the borders of the triangle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shot, now at the midst, where stood the staff.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At this impatiently did <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stamped with his feet, and gnawed his sabre’s hilt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried, “Major Plut, what is to come of this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon none will here remain to give commands.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Plut in anger said to Thaddeus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shame on you, Master Pole, to hide behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A piece of wood; be not a coward, come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out in the midst; fight honourably, like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A soldier.” To him Thaddeus made reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Then, Major, if you are so bold a knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why hide you thus behind a <i xml:lang="de">Jäger’s</i> collar?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am not afraid of you; come from behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hedges; you have caught it on your face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet I’m ready still to fight with you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why all this bloodshed? For between us two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This quarrel was; let pistols or the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decide it. I will give you choice of arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From cannons down to pins. If not, I’ll shoot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You all like wolves in pitfalls.” Saying this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fired, and aimed so well, that the lieutenant</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>He struck who stood at side of <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>.</span>
					<span>“Major,”</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Rykow whisper, “go you forth to duel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revenge his earlier doings in the morn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if another slay this nobleman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You will not, Major, wash away your shame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This noble must be lured into the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rifle may not slay him, but the sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘What knocks no art is; I prefer what pierces,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did old <span xml:lang="pl">Suwarow</span> say; go to the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or he will shoot us, Major, every one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look, now he’s taking aim.” Thereto the Major:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“<span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>, dear friend, a dreadful fellow thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art with the sword; go thou forth, brother <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hark ye what, I’ll send out some lieutenant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I as the Major may not leave the soldiers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I am in command of the battalion.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This hearing, <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> raised his sword, went forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boldly, commanded firing to give o’er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waved a white cloth, and asked of Thaddeus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What weapon pleased him. The conditions made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They both agreed on swords. But Thaddeus had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sword, and while they sought for one on rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count all armed, and broke their conference off.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He cried out, “<span xml:lang="pl">Pan Soplica</span>, by your leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You have the Major challenged. With the captain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have a previous quarrel. In my castle”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Say, sir,” broke in Protasy, “in <em>our</em> castle”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“He entered,” said the Count, concluding, “at</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The head of all those thieves. He⁠—I knew <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound fast my jockeys. Him I will chastise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I chastised the robbers ’neath that rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which the Sicilians call Birbante-Rocca.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All then was silent, and the firing ceased.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both armies gazed with curiosity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the meeting of their generals.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count and Rykow went, they turned aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each other with the right hand threatening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And right eye; with their left hands then they bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their heads, and courteously salute; the custom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of honour, ere it come to murdering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First to salute. Their swords already met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had begun to clash. The heroes lift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their feet, and on the left knee kneel, by turns</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Backward and forward springing.</span>
					<span>But as Plut</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw Thaddeus standing right before his front,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke in whispers to Gefreiter Gont,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who passed as foremost shooter in the band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Gont,” said the Major, “see’st that gallows-thief?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou canst lodge a bullet in him, there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the fifth rib, thou shalt get from me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four silver roubles.” Gont turned round his gun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stooped to the lock, his faithful comrades with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their mantles hid him, and he fired, not at</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rib, but at the head of Thaddeus;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot, and hit very near, in middle of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hat. Aside turned Thaddeus; then the Baptist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Rykow fell, and all the nobles after,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclaiming, “Treachery!” Him shielded Thaddeus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce Rykow in retreating could succeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fall into the centre of his ranks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Once more did the Dobrzynskis onward charge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vying with Litva; spite of discord past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between the parties, all like brothers fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one cheered on the other. The Dobrzynskis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who saw Podhajski wheel around before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <i xml:lang="de">Jäger</i> ranks, down-mowing with his scythe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried out rejoicing, “The Podhaje live!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward, Litvini brothers! Litva, Litva!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Skolubowie</span>, seeing valiant Razor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though wounded, fly on with his sword raised high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried out, “The Matthews! long live the Masovians!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each giving heart to each, they charge upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Russians; vainly Robak and Matthias</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>Would hold them back.</span>
					<span>While thus they smote the band</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> from the front, the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle-field, and towards the garden went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at his side the sage Protasy came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span> gave him orders whispering.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There stood within the garden, close unto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The very wall that Rykow chose as base</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his triangle, a large ancient cheese-store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Builded in lattices, with rafters bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cross-ways, in cage-like form. Within it gleamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great heaps of whitest cheeses, and around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were sheaves of herbs there laid to dry, of sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of <i xml:lang="la">carduus benedictus</i>, and wild thyme;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A herbary complete, the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span>’s daughter’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Store of domestic medicine. Above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cheese-store was some seven ells in breadth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below, it rested on one mighty pillar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a stork’s nest. That old and oaken column</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaned sidewards, ’twas already half-decayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threatened accident. Not once alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Judge was counselled to throw down the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made weak by age; but always said the Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rather would repair than pull it down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else he would rebuild. Thus he delayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The building till some more convenient time;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile beneath the pillar he caused place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two props; the building thereby reinforced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet unlasting, o’er the garden wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked down on Captain <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>’s triangle.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Towards this cheese-house silently the <span xml:lang="pl">Wojski</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> go; each with a monstrous pole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As with a spear is armed, the housekeeper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastes through the hemp-plants after them, likewise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scullion, though a small boy, very strong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When there, upon the rotten column’s top</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They placed the poles, and pushed with all their strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As watermen push off a barge when moored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On sandy shallows, and away from shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With long poles push it off into the deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The column shook, the cheese-house tottered, fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Headlong with crash of wood and cheeses on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Muscovite triangle, crushing, wounding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slaying; where the files had stood, now lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Corpses, and wood, and cheeses white as snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defiled with blood and brains. The triangle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke into fragments, and the Sprinkler thundered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon their midst; already gleamed the Razor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Rod smote; from forth the house there rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A crowd of noblemen, and from the gates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Count his cavalry did hurl upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>The fugitives.</span>
					<span>Eight <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> now alone,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sergeant at their head, still make defence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span> rushes up, they boldly stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine barrels pointed straightway at his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rushed upon their shot, the Penknife’s blade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round whirling. This the priest perceiving, ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the <span xml:lang="pl">Klucznik</span>’s way, himself he falls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strikes Gervasy’s foot. They fell, just when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The platoon fired. The lead scarce whistled by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When up Gervasy stood. Into the smoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sprung, at once swept off two <i xml:lang="de">Jägers’</i> heads.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest in terror fled; he them pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smote; they ran across the courtyard, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind them. In the barn doors opening wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rushed. Gervasy rushed into the barn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon their necks, and vanished in the dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not neglected battle. Through the doors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came groans, a shouting, and blows thickly dealt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon all was silent. Forth Gervasy came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>With bloody sword, alone.</span>
					<span>The nobles now</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had cleared the plain, pursued the <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i>, scattered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut down, ran through. <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span> alone remained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cried he never would lay down his arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fought on, when the Chamberlain now came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards him, who with sword uplifted said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Captain, you will not stain your honour by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accepting quarter; you have given proof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unfortunate, though brave, of courage; lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your sword down, ere we with our sabres shall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disarm you; you shall keep both life and honour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>You are my prisoner.”</span>
					<span>Then <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>, by</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain’s exceeding dignity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now vanquished, bowed low, and to him his sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unsheathed, with bloodstained hilt gave up; then said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ye Lachy! brothers! woe to me that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not a single cannon. Well <span xml:lang="pl">Suwarow</span></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was used to say, ‘Remember, comrade <span xml:lang="pl">Rykow</span>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without some cannon never march on Poles.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> all were drunk! the Major let</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Them drink! Oh, Major Plut was very wilful.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he shall answer to the Czar, for he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was in command. But I, Sir Chamberlain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be your friend. A Russian proverb says,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Who loveth greatly, he, Sir Chamberlain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will stoutly fight.’ You are good at drinking-bout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And good at fighting out, but cease to vent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="dl2">
					<span>On <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> your excesses.”</span>
					<span>Hearing this,</span>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chamberlain his sabre straight upraised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the <span xml:lang="pl">Wozny</span> proclamation made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of general pardon; then he gave command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look unto the wounded, clear the field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of corpses, and the disarmed <i xml:lang="de">Jägers</i> lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away as prisoners. Long they searched for Plut.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, deeply buried in the nettles, lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As lifeless; but at last came forth, when he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Became aware the battle all was done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such ending the last foray had in Litva.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-232" id="noteref-232" epub:type="noteref">232</a></span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
