<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Rules for Pronunciation of the Polish Words in the Text</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface-1" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Rules for Pronunciation of the Polish Words in the Text</h2>
			<p>The letters <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">b</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">d</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">f</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">h</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">k</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">m</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">n</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">p</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">r</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">s</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">t</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">z</i>, are pronounced as in English, except when modified, as several of them are, by particular dots or accents, necessary for the expressing of Slavonic sounds in Roman letters.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">C</i> is invariably pronounced soft, like <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">tz</i>, before all vowels and before consonants, even in cases where it is hard in other languages; as <span xml:lang="pl">Soplica</span>, pronounced <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">Soplitza</i>. Before the vowel <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">i</i> it has a palatal sound, not unlike <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">c</i> in Italian.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">G</i> is invariably hard, as in gill, get.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">J</i> has the same sound as in Italian or German.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">K</i> is used for the hard <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">c</i> of other languages, and in foreign words is substituted for it, as Catholic, written in Polish <span xml:lang="pl">Katolik</span>.</p>
			<p>The letter <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">l</i> has two forms, one corresponding to our own; the other with a delicate stroke down has a peculiar sound, slightly resembling our <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">w</i>, scarcely ever mastered by foreigners. In the present work it has been judged best, owing to the impossibility of procuring suitable type, to use the simple <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">i</i> throughout.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">N</i> accented is pronounced like the Spanish <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ñ</i> in cañon.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">W</i> like <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">v</i>.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">Z</i> as in English; when dotted <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ż</i>, pronounced like <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">j</i> in French; with an accent <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ź</i> the sound is sharper.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">Sz</i> has the sound of <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">sh</i> in English.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">Cz</i> is pronounced like <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ch</i> in church.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">Rz</i> has the sound resembling that of the dotted <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ż</i> or French <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">j</i>; thus the proper name of <span xml:lang="pl">Dobrzynski</span> is pronounced as if written Dobrjiñskee.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">Szcz</i> is pronounced with both sounds of <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">sz</i> and <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">cz</i> thoroughly distinct, so that the combination resembles <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">shtch</i>.</p>
			<p>The vowels <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">a</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">e</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">i</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">o</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">u</i>, are pronounced as in all Continental languages, very broad and full. <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">A</i> and <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">e</i> are, however, susceptible of modifications, causing them to sound like <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">en</i> and <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">in</i> in French. Particular forms of the letters are used for these sounds in Polish; but in this translation the nasals are expressed by <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">m</i> or <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">n</i>, as <span xml:lang="pl">Rembajlo, Czenstochowa</span>⁠—a form of spelling warranted by Polish usage.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.b.</abbr>⁠—Consonants are pronounced far more lightly than in English.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
